Project Management Institute

PRACTICE STANDARD
FOR PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT

‘sane 978-1-222000.98-8

Pubes by:
Project Management ast,
14 Carpus Bouvard
Neon Square, Pannsivania 19073-9200 USA
Phone: 610-256-4600,
Fe +690-256-4647
Ema customercareopiorg

Intro wa picrg
(©2009 Poot Management nto, el igh asred

“PM te PU og, "PUP" the PHP loge, "PMBOK, "Pg", "Project ManagomentJouna”, "PM Neer, ad th PM
“Today logo ae restored mars of reject Managomet Inst, ne The Quarter Gabe Design sa trademark lhe Project
‘Manageme inst, For a compohonsve sof PI marks, cetct he PMI Logal Department

PM Fubcaons wacames coectons and commants an is books. Please eee to sand comments on ypographical
formating, or otber aor. Simpy make a.copy of the relrant page of tha bookmark he ea and send io: Book Et,
PM Pubcans, 14 Campus Boulevard, Newtown Suse, PA 1073-2209 USA

Taingie aout dszounts forse oedveatonal purposes, please contact ha PMI Bock Srvc Cnt
PM Book Saree Cater
Box 932683, Alana, GA 3119-2683 USA
Phone 1-966-276-4768 (thin the U.S. or Canad) or +1-770-280-4129 aba)
Fae 1-770-200-4113
smal: ook edertpm.og

Pit in th Utd Slats of Areca. No part of his work may be rproduod ar rans in any frm or by any means,
‘loco, manual, photocopying recording, cr by ay infomation strap and reel syste, without re writen
‘ermistio he publi.

“The paper used inthis book comps wih the Parmanent Paper Sanda issued by ha National norton Standards
Organization 20 48—1984,

woa7essazt

a Mixed Sources


nnn
NOTICE

‘The Project Management institute, Inc. (PMI) standards and guideline publication, of which the document
contained herein is one, are developed though a voluntary consensus standards development process. This
process brings together volunteers and/or seeks aut the views of persons wi have an interest inthe topic
‘covered by this publication While PMI administers the process and establishes rules to promate fainess in
the development of consensus, it does not write the document and it does not independenty test, evaluate,
‘or very the accuracy or completeness of any information or the soundness of any judgments contained in its
standards and guideline publications

Ml scaims ably for any personal injury, property or other damages of any nature whatsoever, whether
special, ndrect, consequential or compensatory, directly or indirectly resuitng from the publication, use of
‘pplication, or reliance on tis dacument. PMI disclaims and makes no quaranty or waranty, expressed or
implied s othe accuracy or completeness of any information published herein and disclaims and makes no
‘warranty thatthe information in this document wil fll any of your particular purposes or needs. PM does
‘ot undertake to quarantze the performance of any individual manufacturer or seller's products or services by
virtue of tis standard or guide.

In publishing and making this document availabe, PMI is nat undertaking to render professional or other
services foror on behalf of any person or ent, noris PMI undertaking to perform any duty owed by any person
‘or entiy to someone else. Anyone using this dacument should rely on his or her own independent judgment
88 appropriate, seek the advice of a competent professional in determining the exercise of reasonable care
in any given circumstances. Information and other standards on the topic covered by tis publication may
be avalable from other sources, which the user may wish to consul for addtional views or information not
covered by this publication

PMI has no power, nor does it undertake to police or enforce compliance with the contents ofthis document.
PM does not ceri, test, or inspect products, design, or installation for safety or health purposes. Any
cetiiction or other statement of compliance wth any health or safety-reated information inthis document
shall not be attributable to PM and is solely the responsibilty of the certfer or maker ofthe statement.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION
1.1. Purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
1.2. Project Risk Management Definition.
1.3 Role of Project Risk Management in Project Management,
1.4 Good Risk Management Practice
15. Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management.
1.6 Conclusion
CHAPTER 2 - PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS.
24° Introduction .
22. Definition of Project Risk
23 Individual Risks and Overall Project Risk.
24 Stakeholder Risk Attitudes
25° erative Process..
26 Communication.
27 Responsibility for Project Risk Management.
28 Project Manager's Role for Project Risk Management
CHAPTER 3 - INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES
3.1. Project isk Management and Project Management.
32. Project Risk Management Processes.
CHAPTER 4 - PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT.
4.1. Purpose and Objectives ofthe Plan Risk Management Process.
42. Critical Success Factors forthe Plan Risk Management Process.
42.1 Identify and Address Barriers to Successful Project
Risk Managemen
42.2 Involve Project Stakeholders in Project Risk Management.
42.3 Comply withthe Organization's Objectives, Policies, and Practices.
43. Tools and Techniques for the Plan Risk Management Proces
43.1. Planning Session:
43.2. Templates.
44 Documenting the Results of the Plan Risk Management Process

©2008 Fro apenas ate Sando fr Pact ak Management

(CHAPTER 5 - IDENTIFY RISKS.

5A
52

Ex

25

25
25

Purpose and Objectives of the Identify Risks Proces
Critical Success Factors for the Identify Risks Process

524 25
522 26
5.2.3 Emergent Identification. 26

5.2.4 Comprehensive Identification . 26
5.2.5 Explicit Identification of Opportunities. 26
5.2.6 Multiple Perspectives 26
5.2.7 Risks Linked to Project Objectives . 26
5.2.8 Complete Risk Statement. 26

5.2.9 Ownership and Level of Detail
5.2.10 Objectivi
‘Tools and Techniques for the Identify Risks Process.

27
27
27

5.3.1 Historical Review. 28
53.2 Current Assessments 28
5.3.3 Creativity Techniques 28
5.4 Documenting the Results of the Identify Risks Process. 29
(CHAPTER 6 - PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS. aT
6.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process......31
62. Critical Success Factors for the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process.....31
6.2.1 Use Agreed-Upon Approach.. 32
6.2.2 Use Agreed-Upon Definitions of Risk Term: 32
6.2.3 Collect High-Quality Information about Risks. 33
6.2.4 Perform Iterative Qualitative Risk Analysis. 33
6.3 Tools and Techniques for the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process......-33,
6.3.1 Select Risk Characteristics that Define Risks’ Importanc 34
6.3.2. Collect and Analyze Dat 34
6.3.3. Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Specific Objectives... 34
6.3.4 Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Overall Project. 34
6.3.5 Categorize Risk Causes. 35
6.3.6 Document the Results of the Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis Process. 35

08 Pet apenas, Race Standart fr Pj Rk Management

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 7 - PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS.
7.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis Process.

7.2. Critical Success Factors for the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis Process
7.2.1 Prior Risk Identification and Qualitative Risk Analysis
Appropriate Project Model
Commitment to Collecting High Quality Risk Dat
Unbiased Data.
Overall Project Risk Derived from Individual Risks..
Interrelationships Between Risks in Quantitative Risk Analysis
7.3. Tools and Techniques for the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis Process..
7.3.1 Comprehensive Risk Representation.

7.32. Risk Impact Calculation.

7.3.3. Quantitative Method Appropriate to Analyzing Uncertainty

7.34 Data Gathering Tools ..

7.35. Effective Presentation of Quantitative Analysis Results.

7.36 Iterative Quantitative Risk Analysis

7.3.7 Information for Response Planning

7.4 Documenting the Results of the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis Process.
CHAPTER 8 - PLAN RISK RESPONSES
8.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Plan Risk Responses Process.

82. Critical Success Factors for the Plan Risk Responses Process.
821 Communica

822 Clearly Define Risk-Related Roles and Responsibilities.

8.2.3 Specify Timing of Risk Responses.

824 Provide Resources, Budget, and Schedule for Responses..

8.25 Address the Interaction of Risks and Responses.

8.26 Ensure Appropriate, Timely, Effective, and Agreed-Upon Responses.

827 Address Both Threats and Opportunities.

828 Develop Strategies before Tactical Responses

8.3. Risk Response Strategies
8.3.1 Avoid a Threat or Exploit an Opportunity.

8.32. Transfer a Threat or Share an Opportunity.

8.3.3. Mitigate a Threat or Enhance an Opportunity .

8.3.4 Accept Threat or an Opportunity.

8.35 Applying Risk Response Strategies to Overall Project Risk

SSSsssSFSGGRRRREFESESRPSESSSSSRHRRRSays

©2008 Fro apenas ate Sando fr Pact ak Management

84 Tools and Techniques for the Pian Risk Responses Process.
84.1 Response Identification.
84.2 Response Selector
843 Action Planning.
8.44 Ownership and Responsibility Assignment.
85 Documenting the Results ofthe Plan Risk Responses Process
85.1 Add Risk Responses to the Risk Register
85.2 Add Corresponding Risk Responses to the Project,
Management Pian..
85.3 Review and Document Predicted Exposure.
CHAPTER 9 - MONITOR AND CONTROL Rist
91. Purpose and Objectives of the Monitor and Control Risks Process..
92 Gritical Success Factors for the Monitor and Control Risks Proces:
92.1 Integrate Risk Monitoring and Control
with Project Monitoring and Control
9.22 Continuously Monitor Risk Trigger Conditions
923 Maintain Risk Awareness..
93. Tools and Techniques for the Monitor and Control Risks Process
9.3.1 Managing Contingency Reserves.
932 Tracking Trigger Conditions.
93.3 Tracking Overall Risk.
93.4 Tracking Compliance
94 Documenting the Results of the Monitor and Control Risks Process...
APPENDICES.
[APPENDIX A - GUIDELINES FOR A PMI PRACTICE STANDARD.
‘AA Introduction
‘APPENDIX B - EVOLUTION OF PMI'S PRACTICE STANDARD FOR PROJECT RISK
(MANAGEMENT.
BA Pre-Project..
B2 Preliminary Work.
B.3_ Scope Change

Seaees

ST

08 Pet apenas, Race Standart fr Pj Rk Management

[APPENDIX C - CONTRIBUTORS AND REVIEWERS OF THE PRACTICE STANDARD FOR PROJECT
RISK MANAGEMENT. 61
C.1 Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Project Core Team.
C2. Significant Contributors.
©.3 Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Team Members.
C4 Final Exposure Draft Reviewers and Contributors.
C5 PMI Standards Member Advisory Group (MAG) .
C6 Staff Contributor.
‘APPENDIX D - TOOLS, TECHNIQUES AND TEMPLATES FOR PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT.
D.1_ Techniques, Examples and Templates for Risk Management Planning
(Chapter 4)..
DAA Techniques..
D2. Techniques, Examples and Templates for Identify Risks (Chapter 5) .
D21 Techniques..
D.3_ Techniques, Examples and Templates for Qualitative Risk Analysis
(Chapter 6).
3.1 Techniques for Perform Qualtitative Risk Analysis.
D4. Techniques, Examples and Templates for Quantitative Risk Analysis
(Chapter 7).
4.1 Techniques for Perform Quantitative Risk Analysi
D5. Techniques, Examples, and Templates for Plan Risk Responses (Chapter 8)..
5.1 Techniques for Plan Risk Response.
D6 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Monitor and Control Risks
(Chapter 9).
.6.1 Techniques for Monitor and Control Risks Process

‘APPENDIX E — REFERENCES

2RaRF

BB ANBB

ages

©2008 Fro apenas ate Sando fr Pact ak Management


LIST OF FIGURES

Hierarchy of PMI Project Risk Management Resources

Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management.

Project Risk Management Process Flow Diagram..

Key Areas of Focus forthe Plan Risk Management Process.
Three Perspectives of Risk Identification.
Cause, Risk, and Effect.
Building Risk Analysis Credibility.
The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process.

Comparison of Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches.

Structure ofa Quantitative Risk Analysis.
Critical Success Factors for Risk Response Planning

The Steps Involved in Planning Risk Responses.

‘Schematic Representation ofthe Monitor and Control Risks Process...

©2009 Roe nape se,



CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

Project Management Institute (PMI practice standards are guides tothe use of tol, technique, or process
identtied in A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide ~ Fourth Editon) of
other PMI standards. Practice standards are targeted at audiences wo participate inthe management of
projects. This includes project managers, project personnel, contract personnel, supervisors, and other project
stakeholders

[AMI practice standard describes processes, activities, inputs, and auputs fora specific Knowiedge Area,
It provides information on what the significant process, too, or technique is, what it does, why itis significant,
when it should be performed or executed, and, if necessary for futher clarification, who shoud perform the
process. practice standard doesnot prescribe hw the process isto be implemented, leaving that subject for
‘other forums such as handbooks, manuals, and courses,

‘This chapter includes the folowing sections:
14 Purpose ofthe Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
1.2 Project Rsk Management Definition
1.3 Role of Project Risk Management in Project Management
14 Good Risk Management Practice
1.5 Critical Suocess Factors for Project isk Management

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

1.4 Purpose of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management

‘The purpose ofthe Practice Standard for Project Rsk Managements toe) provide a standard for project
management practitioners and other stakeholders that defines the aspects of Project Risk Management that
‘ate recognized as good practice on most projects most ofthe time and (b) provide a standard thats globally
applicable and consistently applied. This practice standard has a descripve purpose rather than one used for
traning or educational purposes.

‘The Practice Standard for Project Risk Management covers risk management as i is applied to single
projects only. Like the PMIBOK® Guide Fourth Edition, his practice standard does not cover risk in programs
(or partflos of projets.

Chapter 11 of the PMBOK® Guide — Fourth Edition, isthe basis for the Practice Standard fr Project Risk
‘Management Ths practice standard is consistent with that chapter, emphasizing the concepts and principles
relating to Project Risk Management. tis aligned with ater PMI practice standards,

Figure 1-1 compares the purposes of tis practice standard to those ofthe PMBOK® Guide — Fourth Eton
‘and textbooks, handbooks, and courses.

Purpose

Practice
Standard

A Guide to the Project
‘Management Body
‘of Knowledge

tnt | tt | ces \ GES

Figure 1-1. Hierarchy of Pl Project Risk Management Resources.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘This practice standard is organized in three main sections:

1. Introductory material including the framework, purpose, principles, context of, and introduction to
Project Risk Management processes as defined in the PMBOK® Guide Fourth Editon

2, Principles underying the six Project Fisk Management processes inthe PMBOK® Guide — Fourth
Euition. The six processes are as follows:

+ Plan Risk Management,
+ entity Risks,

+ Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis,
+ Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis,
+ Plan Risk Responses, and

+ Monitor and Control sks.

Each ofthese six processes is descrived in a chapter that addresses the following four topics:
(2) purpose and objectives ofthe process; (b critical success factors for the process; c) tools and
techniques forthe process; and (d) documenting the resis of the process.

‘3. A glossary of terms which ae used inthis practice standard

‘This practice standard emphasizes those principles that are fundamental to effective, comprehensive,
‘and successful Project Risk Management. These principle can and shouldbe stated at @ general level for
several reasons:

1. Principles are expected to be agreed upon now and to be valid in the future. While tools and
techniques are constanty evolving the principles have more stabilty and persistence

2, Diferent projets, organizations, and situations wil require different approaches to Project Risk
Management. In particular, sk management sa discipline that contains a series of processes to
apply to both large and smal projects. Risk management wil be mor ettective it its practice is
talored tothe project and congruent withthe organizational cuture, processes and assets. There
are many diferent ways of conducting risk management that may comply with the principles of
Project Risk Management as presented in his practice standard

‘3, The principles are applicable to projects carried out in a global context, reflecting the many
business and organizational arangements between participants, for example, joint ventures
between commercial and national companies, government and non-government organizations,
and the cross-cultural environment often found on these projec teams,

‘The principles described herein can be used as a check for an arganizain’s processes Practoners can
establish processes specific o their particular situation, project, or organization and then compare them with
these principles, thus validating them against good Project Rsk Management practice.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

1.2 Project Risk Management Definition

‘The defniton of Project Risk Management, a defined inthe PHBOK® Guide — Fourth Eton, i the basis
for this practice standard: "Project Risk Management includes the processes concerned with conducting
risk management planning, dentficaton, analysis, sponses, and monitoring and control ona project." The
PMBOK® Guide — Fourth Edton also states: “The objectives of Project Risk Management are to increase the
‘robabilty and impact of postive events, and decrease the probably and impact of negative events inthe
project." nthe PMBOK® Guide — Fourth Eton, ‘project rik san uncertain event or condition tha iitoccurs,
has a postive or negative effect on a project's objectives.” Project objectives include scope, schedule, cost,
‘and quaity

Project Risk Management aims to identity and prioritize risks in advance oftheir occurrence, and provide
‘action-oriented infomation to project managers. This orientaton requires consideration of events that may
‘or may not accur and are therefore described in terms of likelnood or probably of occurrence in aditian to
‘other dimensions such as their impact on objectives.

1.3 Role of Project Risk Management in Project Management

Project Risk Management is not an optional activity: itis essential to successful project management.
It should be applied to all projects and hence be included in project plans and operational documents. In
this way, it becomes an integral part of every aspect of managing the project, in every phase and in every
process grup,

Many ofthe project management processes address planning the project, from concept to final design
‘and from procurement through dally management of execution and close-out. These processes often
‘assume an unrealistic degree of certainty about the project and, therefore, they need to include treatment of
project risks.

Project Risk Management addresses the uncertainty in project estimates and assumptions. Therefor, it
bulls upon and extends other project management processes. For instance, project scheduing provides dates
‘and citical paths based on activity durations and resource availablity assumed to be known with certainty
‘Quantitative risk analysis explores the uncertainty inthe estimated durations and may provide atematve dates
‘and eical paths that are more realistic given te risks tothe project

Project Risk Management is nota substitute fr the other project management processes. On the contrary,
Project Risk Management requires tha these project management processes (e.. scheduling, budgeting, and
‘change management be performed atte level ofthe best practices avaliable. Project Rsk Management adds
the perspective of projet risk tothe outputs of thase ather processes and adds to ther value by taking risk
into account For instance, risk management provides the basis upon which to estimate the amount of cost and
schedule contingency reserves that are needed to cover isk response actions to required level of confidence
{or meeting project objectives.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘There isa paradox aout project risk that alects most projects nthe earl stages of a project, the level of
risk exposure is atts maximum but information on the project risks is ata minimum. This situation does not
mean that a project should not go forward because lite is known at that tim. Rather, there may be diferent
ways of approaching the project that have ferent risk implications. The more this situation is recognized, the
more realistic the projet plans and expectations of resis il be

‘tisk management approach is applicable throughout a projets ite cycle. The earlier in the projet ite
‘yc thatthe rsks are recognized, the more realistic the project plans and expectations of results wl be. Rsk
management continues to add value as project planning progresses and moe information becomes avaible
‘out all aspects and components ofthe project and is environment, such as stakeholders, scope, time, and
cost, as well asthe coresponding assumptions and constraints. Te balance between projec lxbility and
‘knowledge about project risk needs tobe reviewed regularly and optimized asthe plans develop.

[tis tue that as the project plan becomes set with fundamental decisions, agreements, and contracts in
‘lace, the options for making substantial changes to capture opportunities or mitigate threats are reduced,
During project execution, risk management processes monitor the changes the project undergoes for new
risks that may emerge so that appropriate responses to them can be developed, as well as check fr existing
risks that are no longer plausible. Project Risk Management plays arte in providing realistic expectation for
the completion dates and cost ofthe project even it there are few options for changing the future.

Final, throughout the project and during project closure, risk-etated lessons are reviewed in order to
contribute to organizational learning and support continuous improvement of Project Risk Management
practice,

1.4 Good Risk Management Practice

Project Risk Management isa valuable component of project management and it ennances the value of
the other project management processes. As with ll ofthese processes, Projet Risk Management shouldbe
Conducted ina manner consistent with exiting organizational practices and policies. nadtion ke the other
processes involved in project management, Project Risk Management should be conducted in way that is
appropriate to the project. Project Risk Management should recognize the business challenges as well s the
mul-cultural environment associated with an increasingly lobal environment including many joint venture
pojcts and customers, suppliers and workforces spread around the lobe

Changes inthe project management plan that result from the Project Risk Management process may
‘require decisions atthe appropriate level of management to reassign personne, establish or modity budgets,
make commitments to others outside the project, interact with regulators, and comply with the rules of
accounting and law. Project Risk Management should be conducted in compliance with these internal and
extemal requirements.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

Project Risk Management should always be conducted on an ethical basis, in keeping wth the Project
Management code of etics or conduct. Honesty, responsibilty, realism, professionalism and fai dealing
With others are among the characteristics of successful Project Rsk Management, Effective Project Risk
Management benef from robust communication and consultation with stakeholders. This enables agreement
‘among stakeholders that Project Rsk Mangement in general, nd risk identfication, analysis, and response,
in particular, shouldbe carried out in realistic and objective way and should not be subject to poltical or other
unreasonable influences,

Project Risk Management shouldbe conducted on all projects. The degree, level of detail sophistication of
tools, and amount of time and resources applied to Project Risk Management should be in proportion tothe
characteristics of the project under management and the value that they can add tothe outcome. Thus, a large
poject that provides value to an important customer would theoretically require more resources, ime, and
attention to Project Rsk Management than would a smal, short-term, internal project tat can be conducted
inthe background with a flexible dean.

Each ofthe Project Risk Management processes should be scaled to be appropriate tothe project under

‘management during the Plan Risk Management process and reviewed periodically to determine if the decisions
made in that process remain appropriate.

1.5 Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management

Recognize
‘the Value of Risk:
Management

Integrate Individual
with Project Commitment/
Management Responsibility,

Risk
Management
‘Success

Scale Risk
Effort
to Project

‘Open & Honest
Communication

Organizational
‘Commitment

Figure 1-2 Critical Success Factors for Project Risk Management

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

Specitic criteria for success of each Project Risk Management process ae listed inthe chapters dealing
with those processes. The general criteria for success include:

Recognize the Value of Fisk Management—Project Risk Management should be recognized
5 a valuable discipline that provides posive potential retum on investment for organizational
management, project stakeholders Goth intemal and exlema), project management, and team
members,

* Individual Commitment Responsiiity—Project participants and stakeholders should all accept
esponsibility for undertaking risk-rlated activities as required. Risk management is everybody's
responsibilty

Open and Honest Communication—Everyone shouldbe involved in te Project Risk Management
process, Any action oratitudesthathinder communication about projctriskreducetheeectiveness
of Project Rsk Management in terms of proactive approaches and effective decision-making,

© Organizational Commitment—Organzational commitment can only be established if risk
management is aligned with the organization's goals and value. Project Risk Management may
‘require a higher level of managerial support than other project management disciplines because
‘handling some ofthe risks will require approval af or responses from others at levels above the
project manager

© isk tort Scaled to Project Project Rsk Management activites shouldbe consistent withthe value
ofthe project othe organization and with its level of project rik, its scale, and other organizational
constrains. n particular, the cast of Projet Risk Management should be appropriate tits potential
value to the projet and the organization

© Integration with Project Management—Project Risk Management does not exist in @ vacuum,
isolated from other project management processes. Successful Project Risk Management requires.
the correct execution of the other project management processes.

‘These citical success factors for Project Risk Management are ilustrated in Figure 1-2.

1.6 Conclusion

‘The principles of Project Risk Management described in tis practice standard should be appropriately
‘applied based on the specifics of a project and the organizational environment. Projet Rsk Management
provides benefts when it is implemented according to good practice principles and with organizational
commitment to taking the decisions and performing actions in an open and unbiased manner.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant


CHAPTER 2
PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS

2.1 Introduction

‘This chapter introduces the key ideas required to understand and apply Projet Risk Management to projects
{allowing the approach descrited in Chapter 11 of the PMBOK® Guide ~ Fourth Editon. These principles and
‘concepts are generally consistent with other approaches to Project isk Management commonly used although
the terminology may ifr in some deta.

‘The execution ofthe Project Risk Management process is dealt with in subsequent chapters ofthis practice
standard and so isnot discussed here.

2.2 Defi

ion of Project Risk

‘The word “risk” is used in many ways in everyday language and in various specialist disciplines. is use
in the PMBOK Guide ~ Fourth Edition is consistent with other risk management standards and process
‘descriptions. The definition of project risk given inthe PMBOK" Guide Fourth Edition is as follows:

Project isk isan uncertain event or condition that, it occurs, has a postive or a negative
effect ona project's ebjectves.

‘This definition includes two key dimensions of risk: uncertainty and effect ona project's objectives. When
assessing the importance ofa project risk, these two dimensions must both be considered. The uncertainty
dimension may be described using the term “probably” and the effect maybe called “impact” though other
descriptors are possible, such as“keinood” and “consequence’).

‘The definition of risk includes both distinct events which are uncertain but can be clearly described, and
‘more general conditions which are less specific but also may give risk to uncertainty. The definition of project
risk also encompasses uncertain events which could have a negative effect on a projects objectives, as
wel as those which could hae a posite effect. These two types of risk are called, respectively, threats and
‘opportunites. tisimportantto address both threats and opportunities within a unified Project Risk Management
process. Tis allows fo the gain of synergies and efficiencies suchas addressing both inthe same analyses
‘and coordinating the responses to bath if they overap or can reinforce each othe.

‘Zaina Pret agement ne, Pace Sand fr Pret i Mnapemant

ne) cuneren 2

PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS

Risks are uncertain future events or conditions which may or may not occur, but which would mater if they
id occur tis important to distinguish risks from rsk-related features, such as cause and effect. Causes are
events o circumstances which currently exist or are certain to exist inthe future and which might give rise
to risks. Effects are conditional future events or conditions which would directly affect one or more project
objectives ifthe associated risk occurs. The cause-risk-effect chain can be used ina structured risk statement
or risk description to ensure that each of these three elements is propery described (se Section 5.3)

‘When 2 risk event occurs, it ceases to become uncertain. Threats which occur may be called issues or
problems; opportunities which accur may be calle benefits. ath issues/problems and benefits ental project
management actions that ae ouside the scope of the Project Risk Management process.

2.3 Individual Risks and Overall Project Risk
[tis useful to consider project isk at two level: nalvidul risks and overall project risk

Individual risks are specific events or conditions that might affect project objectives. An individual risk
may positively or negatively affect one or more af te project objectives, elements, or tasks. Understancing
individual risks can assist in determining how to apply effort and resources to enhance the chances of project
success. Day-to-day Project Risk Management focuses on these individual risks in order to enhance the
prospects ofa sucessful projet outcome.

Overall project risk represents the effect of uncertainty on the project as @ whole. Overall project risk is
‘more than the sum of individual risks ona projet, since it applies to the whole project rather than to individual
elements or tasks. t represents the exposure of stakeholders to the implications of variations in project
‘outcome. Its an important component of strategic decision-making, program and portfoio management,
and project governance where investments are sanctioned r cancelled and pire are set. A these higher
levels it is necessary to set realistic targets forthe cast and duration ofa project, establish the contingency
reserve levels required to protec the project stakeholders, set appropriate project pists, and judge whether
the risk of overall success is increasing or decreasing as implementation advances.

2.4 Stakeholder Risk Attitudes

‘The risk attitudes ofthe project stakeholders determine the extent to wich an individual isk or overall
project risk matters. A wide range of factors influence risk attitude. These include the scale ofthe project
within the range of stakeholders’ overall activites, the strength of public commitments made about the
performance of the project, and the stakeholders’ sensitivity to issues such as environmental impacts,
industrial relations, and other factors, Stakeholder risk attitudes usually result in a desire for increased
certainty in project outcomes, and may express a preference for ane project objective ver another. How risk
is regarded is usually also strongly influenced by an organization’ culture. Different organizations are more
Cor less open, and this offen impacts the way risk management can be applied

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

Understanding stakeholders’ attitudes toward riskisan important component of sk management planning
that precedes risk identification and analysis, in order to optimize both project success and stakeholder
satstacton with the projects results. These atitudes should be identified and managed proactively and
deliberately throughout the Project Risk Management process. They may difr from one project to another
for the same stakeholders and will usualy lifer from one group of stakeholders to another. Infact a single
stakeholder may adopt ctferent risk attudes at various stages inthe same projec.

itis also important to understand the particular implications of stakeholder isk attitudes on projects where
the team i intemationa, cross-industry, or mult-orgnizational

2.5 Iterative Process

itis the nature of projects that circumstances change as they are being planned and executed. The amount
of information available abou risks wil usually increase as time goes on. Same risks wil accu while others wll
not, new risks wil arise or be discovered, and the characteristics of those already identified may change. AS 2
result, the Project Risk Management processes should be repeated and the corresponding plans progressively
elaborated throughout the ifetime ofthe projec.

‘To ensure that Project Risk Management remains effective, the identification and analysis of risks should
be revisited periodically, the progress on risk response actions should be monitored, and the action plans
adjusted accordingly. extemal circumstances change significant, t may also be necessary to revisit the risk
management planing proces.

‘The development ofan inital risk management plan and risk assessment isthe start of the process, not
the end. The frequency and depth of reviews and updates wll depend on the nature ofthe project, the volatility
ofthe environment in which the project is being implemented, ad the timing of other project management
reviews and updates.

2.6 Communication

Project Risk Management cannot take place in isolation. Success relies heavily on communication
‘throughout the process.

Fisk identification and analysis depend on comprehensive input from stakeholders ina project to ensure
‘that nothing significant is overlooked and that risks are realistically assessed. The credibility of the process
‘and the commitment of those wino should act to manage risks can be assured only i the way the process
‘operates and the conclusions produces are understood and seen as credible by all concemed, This demands
elective and honest communication fromthe Project Risk Management process tothe rest ofthe project team
‘and other projet stakeholders, Communication ofthe results ofthe Project Rsk Management pracess should
be targeted to meet the spectc needs of each stakeholder and should be reflected within the overall project
‘communications strategy with each stakeholders responsibilty and rle in risk management identified and
greed-upon

‘Zaina Pret agement ne, Pace Sand fr Pret i Mnapemant

ne) cuneren 2

PRINCIPLES AND CONCEPTS

2.7 Responsibility for Project Risk Management

Itmay be considered simplistic to say "isk managements everyone's responsibly” as previously stated
However it is important that management of project risk isnot left to afew risk specialist. Project Risk
Management shouldbe included as an integra pat of all other project processes. Since project risks can
affect project objectives, anyone with an intrest in achieving those objectives should play aoe in Project Risk
Management. The specific oles depend onthe project team members’ and other stakeholders’ place within
the project and their relation to project objectives. Roles and responsibilities for Project Risk Management
should be clearly defined and communicated, and individuals should be held responsible and accountable
for results. This includes allocating responsiblity for specific activities within the rsk process, as well as for
resulting actions required to implement agreed-upon responses. Responsibility shoul also be allocated for
‘ensuring thatrsk-elated lessons are captured for future use.

2.8 Project Manager's Role for Project Risk Management

‘The project manager has particular responsibil in relation tothe Project Risk Management process
‘The project manager has overall esponsibity for delivering a successful project which fuly meets the defined
objectives. The project manager is accountable forthe day-to-day management ofthe project, incuding
effective risk management The role af the project manager may include:

* Encouraging senior management support for Project Rsk Management activites

* Determining the acceptable levels of risk forthe projec in consultation with stakeholders,

* Developing and approving the risk management pan.

+ Promoting the Project Risk Management process for the project.

+ Facilitating open and honest communication about risk within the project team and with
management and other stakeholders,

+ Participating in ll aspects ofthe Project Rsk Management process,
Approving risk responses and associated actions prior to implementation,

+ Applying project contingency funds to deal with identified risks that occur during te project.
+ Overseeing risk management by subcontractors and suppliers.

+ Regularly reporting risk status to key stakeholders, with recommendations for appropriate strategic
‘decisions and actions to maintain acceptable risk exposure

Escalating identified risks to senior management where appropiate: such sks include any which are
‘outside the authority of conto ofthe project manager, any wich requir input oration from outside
the project, and any for which the release of management reserve funds might be appropriate

* Monitoring te efficiency and effectiveness ofthe Project Risk Management process.
* Auditing risk responses fr their effectiveness and documenting lessons eared,

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

CHAPTER 3
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESSES

3.1 Project Risk Management and Project Management

‘Al projects are uncertain. Uncertainty is inevitable since projects are unique and temporary undertakings
‘based on assumptions and constrains, delivering project results to multple stakeholders with diferent
requirements. Project management can be seen as an attempt to control tis uncertain environment, through
the use of structured and disciplined techniques such as estimating, planning, cost contol, ask allcaton,
‘eamed value analysis, monitoring and review meetings, et. Each ofthese elements of project management
thas arle in defining or controling the uncertainty which is inherent in al projects.

Project Risk Management provides an approach by which uncertainty can be understood, assessed, and
managed within projects. As such i forms an integral part of project management, and effective Project Risk
Managements acral sucess factor for project success,

For project management to be fully eective, however, itis important that Project Risk Managements not
viewed as an optional pracess or performed as an ational overhead task. Since many elements of project
management adress inherent uncertainty, th interface between structured Project Risk Management and the
‘other processes of project management needs to be clear. The auiputs of Project Risk Management should be
taken into account within many of the project management processes. They can, for example, impact:

+ Estimating resource requirements, cost, or duration;

+ Assessing the impact of proposed scope changes;

* Planning or replanning the forward strategy ofthe project:

locating resources to tasks; and

+ Reporting progres to stakeholders

None of these actions can be performed propery without a clear view ofthe risk involved, as determined

uring the Project Risk Management process. In ather words, project management process effectiveness is
increased by using the information and results from Project Risk Management

In addition, effective Project Risk Management requires input from other project management processes.
‘Outputs such as the work breakdown structure (WBS), estimates, the project schedule, assumptions lst, etc.
areal important prerequisites fr effective Project Risk Management

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

3.2 Project Risk Management Processes

‘The defined steps of Project Risk Management describe a structured approach for understanding and
managing risk ona project. This chapter outines the steps required fr effective Projet Risk Management.
Each step is described in more detail in subsequent chapters,

As previously defined, projet risk isan uncertain event or condition tha, iit occurs, has a postive or
negative effect on a project's objectives. From this definition, itis clear that risks only exist in relation to
objectives. tis therefore essential atthe start ofthe Project Risk Management process to clearly define the
objectives. tis also clear that diferent projects are exposed to diferent levels of risk, so each step inthe
Project Risk Management process shoul be scalable to meet the varying degrees of risk. Scalable elements
ofthe process include:

+ Available resources,
+ Methodology and processes used,
+ Toos and techniques used,

+ Supporting infrastructure,

+ Review and update frequency, and
+ Reporting requirements.

‘As aprecondition fora successful Project Risk Management implementation itis important tohave a dear
‘understanding of the isk thresholds that define the key stakeholders’ views on acceptable levels of risk, as
well asa framework against which identified risks can be assessed,

‘Asa result the Project Rsk Management process always start with an ination step This is required in
‘order to ensure common understanding and agreement ofthe team and ater stakeholders onthe approach
‘and parameters that willbe aplied in managing risk inthis project, as wel as the scope and objectives of the
Project Risk Management process itself. Project Risk Management activites, resources, and attention should
‘be appropriate to the projec since diferent projects warrant ctferent levels of risk management application
‘The main actions to provide the required talring are as follows:

* Detine those objectives against which risks willbe identi,
* Detine how the elements ofthe Project Risk Management process wil be scaled for this
project, and
+ Define risk thresholds, tolerances, and the assessment framework,
‘The outputs ‘fom this inital step should be documented, communicated, and then reviewed by the

stakeholders to ensure a common understanding of the scope and objectives forthe Project isk Management
process. The document shouldbe formally approved ata senior level

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

(nce the Project Risk Management scope and objectives are agreed upon, itis possible to start identifying
risk, being careful to cstinguish genuine risks from nonrisks (such a causes, effects, problems, issues et.)
‘A vatety of risk identification techniques is avaiable, each wit its own stengths and weaknesses. One or
more techniques shouldbe selected as appropriate for meeting the needs of the specific project. The aim is
to expose and document all knowable risks, recognizing that some risks wil be inherently unknowable and
others will emerge later inthe projet. The emergent nature of risk requires the Project Risk Management
process tobe iterative, repeating the entity Risks process in order to find risks which were nat evident earlier
inthe project. Input should be sought from a wide range of project stakeholders when identitying risks, since
ech willhave a cfferent perspective onthe risks facing the project. Historical records and project documents
should also be reviewed to identi risks for this project.

All identified risks are recorded. Welly, a risk owner is designated for each identified risk. tis the
responsibilty ofthe risk owner to manage the coresponding risk through al ofthe subsequent Project Risk
Management processes.

Following risk identification itis necessary to evaluate the importance ofeach ris, inorder to prioitize
individual risks for further attention, evaluate the level of overall projet risk, and determine appropriate
responses. Risk evaluation can be performed using qualitative techniques to address individual risks, using
‘quantitative techniques to consider the overalletfetof riskon the project autcome,o using bothin combination,
‘These two approaches require ferent types of data, but wiere both qualitative and quanttative techniques
‘are used, an integrated approach shouldbe adopted

‘Qualitative techniques are used to gain a better understanding of individual risks, considering a range
of characteristics such as probability of occurence, degree of impact on project objectives, manageabilly,
timing of possible impacts, relationships with other risks, common causes or effects, ec. Understanding and
prortzing risks isan essential prerequisite to managing them, so qualiative techniques are used on most
projects. The outpus from qualitative assessments should be documented and communicated to key project
stakeholders and frm a bass for determining appropiate responses

‘Quantitative techniques provide insights into the combined effect of identified risks on the project outcome
‘These techniques take into account probabilistic or projct-wide effects, such as correlation between risks,
interdependency, and feedback loops, thereby indicating the degree of overall isk faced by the project. The
result is an indication of the degree of overall isk faced by the project. The results of quantitative analysis
should be used to focus the development of appropriate responses, particularly the calculation of required
contingency reserve levels, and must be documented and communicated to inform subsequent actions
‘Quantitative techniques may not be required forall projets to ensure effective management of risk

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

(nce individual risks have been prioritized andthe degree of overall project risk exposure is understood,
appropriate risk responses should be developed using an iterative process which continues until an optimal
set of responses has been developed. A range of possible response strategies exists for both threats and
‘opportunites. Therisk owner shouldseectasultabe strategy foreach individual risk based on scharacterisics
and assessed priory, ensuring thatthe strategy is achievable, affordable, cost effective, and appropiate. The
use of a single strategy that addresses several elated risks shouldbe considered whenever possible. The risk
‘owner is responsible for dfiing actions to implement the chosen strategy. These actions may be delegated to
action avers as appropriate. The risk ovmer should monitor actions to determine their efleciveness and also
to identity any secondary risks which may arise because ofthe implementation of risk responses. In addition
to individual risk responses, actions may be taken to respond to overall project risk. Al response strategies
‘and actions should be documented and communicated to key project stakeholders and incorporated into the
project plan,

Iti essential that agreed-upon actions are implemented; otherwise the rsk exposure ofthe projet remains
‘unchanged. tis also itl thatthe Project Risk Management process be repeated at regular intervals throughout
the ie ofthe project. This wil enable the project team to reevaluate the status of previously identified risks,
to_denty emergent and secondary risks, and to determine the effectiveness of the Project Risk Management
process.

‘The steps cutned previously frm the Project Risk Management process. These are detailed in subsequent
chapters, s follows:

* Plan Risk Management (Chapter 4)—Defines the scope and objectives of the Project Risk
Management process, and ensures that the risk process is fuly integrated into wider project
management

© Identity Risks (Chapter §}—Identifes as many knowable isks as practicable,

+ Pertorm Qualitative Risk Analysis (Chapter 6)—Evaluates key characteristics of inavidual risks
‘enabling them tobe prioritized for further action

+ Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis (Chapter 7)—Evaluates the combined effect of risks onthe
overall project outcome.

* Plan Risk Responses (Chapter &)—Determines appropriate response strategies and actions for
each individual risk and for overall project risk, and integrates them into a consolidated project
management plan,

* Monitor and Control Risks (Chapter 9)—Implements agreed-upon actions, reviews changes in
oject risk exposure, identifies addtional risk management actions as required, and assesses the
effectiveness ofthe Project Risk Management process.

Figure 3-1 shows the flow of contol and information between the various steps within the Project Risk
Management process.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

CHAPTER 3

Figure 3-1. Project Risk Management Process Flow Diagram

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant


CHAPTER 4
PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT

4.4 Purpose and Objectives of the Plan Risk Management Process

‘The objectives of the Plan Risk Management process are to develop the overall risk management strategy
for the project, to decide how the risk management processes will be executed, ad to integrate Project Risk
Management with all other project management activites.

Effective risk management requires creation ofa rsk management plan. This plan describes how the
risk management processes should be caried out and how they fit in with the other project management
processes. Ona broader level, t describes the relationships among Project Risk Management, general project
management, andthe management processes inthe rest ofthe organization. To provide the greatest benefit,
inital risk management planning should be caried out eal in the overall planing ofthe projet, and the
corresponding risk management activites integrated into the overall project management plan. The risk
management plan may subsequently need to be adapted as the needs ofthe project and its stakeholders
‘become clearer ar change.

‘Although the Projet Risk Management processes form an integral part ofthe verall project management
plan, a budget in terms of resources, cost, and time forthe specific risk management actives should be
established in order to better track, conrl, and, as necessary, defend the coresponding expenditures
‘throughout the project The cost of treating te risks themselves shouldbe included appropriately inthe project
‘budget, while the risk management plan should describe how this part ofthe project budget is evaluated,
allocated, and managed. The risk management plan wil define the monitoring methods to ensure thatthe
corresponding expenditures are tracked appropriately, as well asthe conditions under which the approved
‘budget for risk management can be modified.

In the same way that project management is @ process of progressive elaboration, risk management
activities need to be repeated throughout the project. The isk management plan should define both the
‘normal frequency for repeating the processes as well as specitic or exceptional conditions under which the
corresponding actions should be intated. The corresponding isk management activites shouldbe integrated
into the project management plan

‘There are two categories of success criteria for rsk management: those for success of the projet in
‘general, and those fr success of Project isk Management.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

a) HAPTER «

LAN RISK MANAGEMENT

* Project-Related Criteria. To assess the success of Project Risk Management, the stakeholders
myst agree on an acceptable level of results forthe projct-elated citra (such as cost, time, and
cope). n order to ensure consistency and agreement among stakeholders, te risk management
plan shoud present these objectives with reference tothe proectdefnion documents. To provide
‘uidance in risk management, particularly in prioritizing risk responses, stakeholders should also
‘roritize each project objective.

* Process-Related Criteria. The measures for success in Project Risk Management depend on a
‘numberof factors, such as the inherent level of uncertainty ofthe project. For example, the Project
Risk Management process fora research project needs to address more unforeseen changes than
for a project with @ more predictable environment. A research Project Risk Management process
may be considered a success even if it results in more variance from the baseline than would be
allowable fora successful process in a more predictable projec.

‘The level of risk that is considered acceptable in a project depends on the risk attitudes ofthe relevant
stakeholders. The rskattudes ofboth the organization and the stakeholders may be influenced by a number
of factors, al of which need to be identified. These include their inherent tolerance for uncertainty, andthe
‘elative importance to them of achieving or missing spectc project objectives. The output ofthis analysis
sould then be taken into account for seting thresholds and providing weighting factors when applying the
Project Risk Management processes in the specific project.

Guidelines and rules fr escalating risk-rlated information to management and other stakeholders should
reflect the risk attitudes and expectations ofthe corresponding stakeholders. The project manager should
maintain effective communication withthe stakeholders as the project evolve, inorder to become aware of
‘any changes in the stakeholders’ attitudes and adapt the risk management approach to take any new facts
into account.

[tis important that the participants share @ common understanding of ll terms used to describe the risk,
‘and thatthe critical values and thresholds that wl serve as parameters forthe tools should be defined in 2
manner consistent with the scope of the project and the atttudes ofthe stakeholders. if qualitative analysis,
uses such terms as "high impact” or “medium probability” these should be defined objectively in the risk
management plan. Simi, the risk management plan should specity any key numerical values require in
‘quantitative analysis a for decision-making in risk response planning o sk montoring and contol

Fisk management planning should establish the type and level of risk detail to be addressed and provide a
template ofthe risk register that wil be used for recording risk-reated information. The risk management plan
should also indicate the intensity of effort and the frequency with which the varius Project Risk Management
processes shouldbe applied; this depends on the characteristics ofthe project as well as onthe specified risk
management objectives.

In order forthe Project Risk Management processes tobe carried out corectly and effectively the project
team and other stakeholders need to know where and when they willbe expected to participate, their itera
for determining success, their level of authority, and what action to take relative to actions or decisions beyond
this level. The risk management plan specifies the project's rsk management rles and responsibilities and
defies the coresponding expectations for both senior management and project personel

‘Gz Pret Management tu Pace Sands fr Pct Ao Menage

Risk-reated communication occurs at two levels: a) within the project team, and (b) between the project
team and the other project stakeholders. The principles for each of these categories of communication are
<efined in the risk management plan Forth team, the plan describes the frequency and scope of te various
risk management meetings and reports required to cary out the corresponding Project Risk Management
processes as well s the structure and content of such meetings and rept. For the other stakeholders, the
plan sets their expectations as to the structure, content, and frequency of routine documents to be received
‘swell as the way in which information will be shared for escalation or exceptional evens. Deals ofthe
infocmation required by the project team from stakeholders should also be clearly defined.

4.2 Cri

ical Success Factors for the Plan

k Management Process

‘The principal itera fora valid risk management plan are acceptance by the stakeholders, alignment
with the internal and external constraints on the project, balance between cost or effort and benefit, and
completeness with respect tothe needs ofthe Project Risk Management process. Cical success factors for
the Pian Risk Management process are detailed below.

42.1 Identify and Address Barriers to Successful Project Risk Management

‘Te time and effort require to cary out the Pan Risk Management process will not be supported unless
the stakeholders, and especially management inthe organization responsible forthe project, recognize and
accept the benefits of managing rsk, andthe added value of addressing this as a skl ints owm right rather
than a a passive or reactive component of genera project management.

‘A clear definition ofthe project objectives and a high-level view ofthe project environment and solution
‘approach are required to provide a valid basis for risk management. The project manager should therefore
ensure that valid definition and planing information is avaiable forthe plan risk management activity.

‘An organization inexperienced in risk management planing may need to develop its own approach and
may expend an inappropriate amount of ime and effort on this. Alternatively it may use a proprietary or
pre-existing approach which requires tallorng. The availablity of some or all ofthe follwing organizational
process assets contibutes to the chances of success of the Plan Rsk Management actives: standard
templates, predefined risk categories, and an established project management methodology incorporating
risk management procedures that specty what risk information is require for decision making, when iis
‘required, anda definition of concepts and terms, roles, responsible, and authority levels. Access to relevant
lessons learned at this stage wil allow tis experience tobe taken into account from the start ofthe project.

‘Te risk management plan will not deliver its value unless Project Risk Management is caried out as
‘an integral part ofthe project. The corresponding activites should be buit nto the project work breakdown
tucture and incuded inthe coresponding schedule, budget, and work-assignment documents.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

a) HAPTER «

LAN RISK MANAGEMENT

422. Involve Project Stakeholders in Project Risk Management

‘The project manager needs to involve te project stakeholders inthe Pan Risk Management actives to
‘bulld on ther skils and experience as well as to ensure their understanding of, and commitment to, the full
Project Risk Management process.

‘The provision for risk management resources spected within the risk management plan should be
approved by management at a evel adequate for caryng out the required Project Risk Management processes
in accordance with agreed-upon objectives. Management should be involved inthe analysis ofthe level of
resoutcing required for managing project risk and accept the risks that may arse from specific limitations
laced on the provision of resources. Disagreements between stakeholders inthe areas of risk tlerance and
evaluation measures shouldbe addressed and resolved

4.2.3 Comply with the Organization's Objectives, Policies, and Practices

‘The feasibly of risk management planning is dependent upon the features of the organization in which
it s carted out. The rules and guidelines defined in thersk management plan shouldbe compatible withthe
culture of the organization, its capabilites from the pont of view of people and facilites and its values, goals,
and objectives.

Project management in general, and sk management in particular, contribute tothe organization’ effective
‘govemance. The risk management plan should identify and take into account the relevant organizational
procedures and any other enterprise environmental factors that anply suchas strategic risk management or
corporate governance processes.

433 Tools and Techniques for the Plan Risk Management Process

43.1. Planning Sessions

Planing sessions are recommended inorder tobullda common understanding ofthe project's risk approach
betwen project stakeholders and to gain agreement on the techniques tobe used for managing risk

Elaboration of the risk management plan often serves to develop an effective means for the team to work
together since a sinilar consultative team approach will be used in subsequent stages ofthe risk management
process. The patcipans should include: the project manager, selected project team members and other
stakeholders, members ofthe broader organization having responsibility fr risk, and other subject matter
‘experts o facilitators, as needed

‘A tis point, the inal risk responses, methodology, templates, terms, dfnitons, time schedules, and
ost budgets forthe other Project isk Management processes shouldbe assigned and accepted, The speciation
{or the tol that wil be used in subsequent processes shoul include all parameters and oher inputs required
{to ensure ther applicability tothe spectc project. These shouldbe documented in the sk management plan,
which, when formally approved, isthe principal deliverable ofthe Pan Risk Management process.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

CHAPTER 4 ~ PLAN RISK MANAGEMENT

43.2. Templates

In oder to benef from experience and existing best practice, isk management planning shoul tke into
‘account relevant existing templates for work products, such as risk status reports, risk breakdown structures
(or the risk register. A decision should be made as to which templates are relevant to the project, and these

should then be adapted and included inthe risk management plan

4.4 Documenting the Results of the Plan Risk Management Process

‘The results of risk management planning are documented inthe risk management pian. The plan serves
{to provide all projec stakeholders with a common view of how thersk-elated activites of the project will be
hanced, what has been agreed upon, and a description ofthe stakeholders’ involvement and responsbilties
in these activities. An overview of the key areas of focus is given in Figure 4-1,

tudes

Tealox

Constraints

oles, responses,
authory

Parameters

‘Amount etal ana
tat

Communications

Detnons

Figure 4-1. Key Areas of Focus fr the Plan Risk Management Process

Depending upon the size and complexity ofthe project, some or al ofthe following elements wil be present
ina risk management plan

Introduction;
Project description;

Risk management methodology
Risk management organization;

Roles, responsibltes, and authority;

‘Stakeholder risk tolerance;
Ctra for success;

Risk management tools and guidelines for use
Thresholds and coresponding definitions;

Template;
‘Communications plan;
‘Strategy; and

Risk breakdown structure

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant


CHAPTER 5
IDENTIFY RISKS

5.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Identify Risks Process

‘risk cannot be managed unless i i ist identified. Consequenty, after risk management planing has
‘been completed, the frst process in the iterative Project Risk Management process aims to identity all the
‘knowabl risks to project objectives.

Iti, however, impossible to identity al the risks atthe outset of a project. Over time, the level of project
risk exposure changes asa result of the decisions and actions taken previously nthe project (ternal change)
and of extemally imposed change

‘The purpose ofrskidentfication is o identity risks tothe maximum extent that is practicable. The fact that
‘some risks are unknowable or emergent requires the Identity Rsk process tobe iterative, repeating the ldentty
Risks process to find new risks which have become knowable since the previeu tration ofthe process.

‘When a rik is first identified, potential responses may also be identified atthe same time. These should be
recorded during the deny Risks process and considered for immediate actin if such action i appropriate
Where such responses are not implemented immediately, these should be considered during the Plan Risk
Responses process.

5.2 Critical Success Factors for the Identify Risks Process

‘The practices described in Sections 5.2.1 through 5.2.10 will maximize the value and effectiveness of the
Identity Risks process and enhance the likelihood of identiying as many risks as practicable

5.2.1 Early Identification

Fisk identification should be performed as early as possible in the projec ifecycle, recognizing the paradox
that uncertainty is high in the intial stages of @projetso thers often less information on which to base the
risk identification. Early risk identification enables Key project decisions to take maximum account of risks
inherent in the project, and may result in changes tothe project strategy. also maximizes the ime avaliable
{or development and implementation of risk responses, which enhances efficiency since responses taken early
‘ate often normally less costly than later ones.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

5.22 Iterative Identification

Since not all rsks canbe identified at any given pont in the project, itis essential that risk identification is
repeated throughout the project lie cycle. This should be done periodically, ata frequency determined during
the Plan Risk Management process. Fisk identification might also be repeated at key milestones inthe project,
‘or whenever there i significant change tothe projector its operating environment

5.2.3 Emergent Identification

In aition to invoking the lentity Risks process as define in the project plan, the Project Risk Management
process should permit risks to be idetited at any time, not limited to formal risk identficaton events or
regular reviews.

5.2.4 Comprehensive Identification
‘Abroad range of sources of risk shouldbe considered to ensure that as many uncertainties as possible that

might affect objectives have been identified.

5.2.5 Explicit Identification of Opportunities

‘The identity Risks process should ensure opportunities are properly considered.

5.2.6 Multiple Perspectives

‘The Identity Risks process should take input from a broad range of project stakeholders to ensure that
all perspectives are represented and considered. Limiting risk identification to the immediate projec tam is
unlikely to expose al knowable risks,

5.2.7 Risks Linked to Project Objectives

Each identied project risk should relate to atleast one project objective (time, cost, quality, scope, et),
‘ating thatthe PMBOK® Guide defines risk as an uncertain event or cancion that, it occurs, has a positive
‘ora negative effect on a projec’ objectives. Consideration ofeach project abective during the ldenty Risks
brocess will assist in identifying risks, noting that some risks may affect more than one objective.

5.28 Complete Risk Statement

Identified risks should be clearly and unambiguously described, so tat they can be understod by those
responsible for risk assessment and risk response planning, Single words or phrases such as “resources”
oF "logistics” are inadequate and do not propery communicate the nature of the risk. More detailed risk
descriptions are required which explicitly state the uncertainty and its causes and effects.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

5.2.9 Ownership and Level of Detail

Risks can be identified at a numberof levels of detail. generalized or high-level description of risk can
make it ficult to develop responses and assign ownership, while describing risks in lat of detal can create
‘a great deal of work. Each risk should be descried ata level of deal at which it canbe assigned toa single
risk owner with clear responsibility and accountability for ts management. Tigger conditions should aso be
identtied where tis is possible and appropriate.

5.2.10 Objectivity

‘A human activites are susceptibie to bias, especially when dealing with uncertainty. Bath motivational
biases, where someone is trying tobias the result in one direction or another, or cognitive biases, where
biases occur as people are using their best judgment and applying heuristics, may occur. This should be
‘explicity recognized and addressed during the leniy Risks process. Sources of bias should be exposed
wherever possible, and their effect on the risk process should be managed proactively The aim isto minimize
subjectivity, and allow open and honest dentiicaton of as many sks as possible to the projet.

5.3 Tools and Techniques for the Identify Risks Process

‘A range of tools and techniques is avaliable for risk identitcation. These fall nto the following three
categories silustrated in Figure 5-1

Creativity Techniques

Figure 5-1. Three Perspectives of Risk identiication

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

5.3.1 Historical Review

Historical reviews are based on what occured inthe pat, iter on this projec, or other similar projects
in the same organization, or comparable projects in other organizations. Historical review approaches rly an
careful selection of comparable situations which are genuinely similar to the current project, and fering of
data to ensure that only relevant previous risks are considered. in each case, te risks identified inthe selected
historical situation shouldbe considered, asking whether they or simiar risks might arise in this project.

5.3.2 Current Assessments

Current assessments rely on detailed consideration ofthe current project, analyzing its characteristics
against given frameworks and models in order to expose areas of uncertainly. Unlike historical review
approaches, current assessment techniques donot rely outside eference points, but are based purely on
‘examination of the project.

5.3.3. Creativity Techniques

‘A wide range of creativity techniques can be used for rsk identification, which encourages project
stakeholders to use their imagination to find risks wich might affect the project. The outcomes or electiveness
ofthese techniques depend on the ability of participants to think creatively. These techniques can be used
either singly o in groups, and employ varying degrees of structure. These techniques depend on the ability of
participants to thnk creatively, and their success is enhanced by use ofa skilled faciitator.

Each category of risk identification technique has strengths and weaknesses, and no single technique
can be expected to reveal all knowable risks. Consequently, the Identity Risks process for a paticular project
should use a combination of techniques, perhaps selecting one ftom each category. For example, a project may
choose to use a rsk identification checklist (historical review), togeter with assumptions analysis (current
assessment) and brainstorming (creativity)

Use ofa risk breakdown structure which organizes the categories of potential risk onthe project, a prompt
list ora set of generic list categories may assist in ensuring that as many sources af risk a practicable have
‘been addressed, while recognizing that no such tels are complete nor can they replace orginal thinking

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘Whichever risk identification techniques are used, itis important that identified risks are unambiguously
escrived inorder to ensure thatthe project rsk process is focused onthe actual risks and not distracted or
uted by nonrsks. Use of structured risk descriptions can ensure clay. Rsk meta-language offers a useful
ay of cstinguishing a risk rom its cause() and effects), describing each risk using three-part statements in
the form: "As a result of cause, risk may occur, which would lead to effect.” The relationship between cause,
risk, and eect is shown in igure 5-2

Cause
(Fact or Condition)

Figure 5-2. Cause, Risk, and Effect

5.4 Documenting the Results of the Identify Risks Process

‘The resulls from the lentily Risks process shouldbe recorded in order to capture all relevant information
currently available foreach identified risk. The main output from the lenty Risks process isthe isk register.
This includes a properly structured r'sk description and the nominated risk owner foreach risk, and may also
include information onthe causes an effect of the rsk, tigger condtons, and preliminary responses.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant


CHAPTER 6

PERFORM QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS

6.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis Process

‘The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process assesses and evaluates characteristics of individually
identi projet rsks and prioritizes risks based on agreed-upon characterises,

Assessing individual risks using qualitative risk analysis evaluates the probability that each risk will occur
‘and the effect of each individual isk onthe projct objectives. As such it doesnot rectly address the overall
risk to projec abecives that results from the combined effect ofall risks and their potential interactions with
act other. This can however be achieved trough use of quantitative risk analysis techniques (see Chapter 7.

One step in the analysis isto categorize risks according to their sources or causes. If several risks aise
‘rom a common source, sometimes called a rot cause, risk responses may be more effective when they focus
‘on aldressing this rot cause.

ldentying comman effects trom groups of risks allows identification ofthe areas of greatest risk exposure
(e.g. tothe project completion date, the budge, ora particular deliverable's scope), fitting risk response
focus in these areas,

‘The methods of qualitative risk analysis are applied to thelist of risks created or updated by the Identity
Risks process to provide project management with the characteristics ofthe risks that have the most influence
(positive or negative) on achieving the project's objectives. isks that are assessed as high prirty to either
threaten or to eniance the achievement of project objectives will be an important focus in the Pian Risk
Responses process. They may be further analyzed, such as in the analysis ofthe overall project risk that is
discussed in Perform Quantitative Rsk Analysis process

6.2 Critical Success Factors for the Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis Process

Several factors that lead to successful qualitative risk analysis are described in Sections 62.1 trough
6.24, and summarized in Figure 6-1. Agreement ofthe project stakeholders isa fundamental criterion and
‘2 common theme. The agreed-upon approach isthe foundation of process credit. Then, agreed-upon
definitions enable high-quality information tobe collected. Finally, with these condition in place, the process
canbe executed reliably, which contributes to the credibility ofits outputs.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

Figure 6-1. Building Risk Analysis Credibility

6.2.1 Use Agreed-Upon Approach

‘The proces is based on an agreed-upon approach to this assessment that is applied across all ofthe
identi risks in any project. By the nature of project risk, al rsks may be assessed according to probably
of occurrence and impact on individual objectives should the risk occur ther factors may be considered in
determining the importance of a risk a flows:

Urgency (proximity). Risks requiring near term responses may be considered more urgent to
‘address. Indicators of urgency can include the lead time necessary to execute a sk response andthe
laity of symptoms and warning sins (also known as detectability) that may tigger the response

+ Manageability. Some risks are not manageable and it woud be a waste of resources to attempt to
adress them. Te project team may examine these and decide to:

© Go forward, perhaps establishing a contingency reserve

© Stop or re-scope the project because these risks pase an unmanageable threat ar an
‘opportunity that should nt be missed with high probability and consequences.

© Inform the customer ofthe risks and ask for @ decision from their point of view.

+ Impact external tothe project. A risk may increase in importance fit affects the enterprise beyond
the project.

622. Use Agroed-Upon Definitions of Risk Terms

‘The risk assessment shouldbe based on agreed-upon definitions of important terms, and those definitions
shouldbe used consistently when assessing each sk. The use of deftions, for example, of eves of probability
‘and of impact on objectives, assists the providers of the information in giving realistic assessments for each
risk, and facitates the communication af the results to management and other stakeholders.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

62.3 Collect High-Quality Information about Risks

Colecton of high-quality information about risks is required. Ofen this information isnot avaiable in any
bistrc database and shouldbe gathered by interviews, workshops, an eter means using exper judgment. Data
‘gathered from individuals may be subject to reporting or intentional bas. When this occurs, the bias should be
identtied and remedied where possible, o a ferent, unbiased source of information should be found and used

6.2.4. Perform Iterative Qualitative Risk Analysis

‘The success of qualitative risk analysis enhanced ifthe process used periodical thoughout the project. t
is impossible to know in advance all te risks tht may occur in a project, therefor the deny Risks and Perform
‘Qualitative Analysis processes shoud be repeated periodical for individual risks. The frequency ofthis effort wi
'be planned in the Plan Rsk Management process, but may also depend on events within the projec isl

6.3 Tools and Techniques for the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process

‘The tools and techniques used for assessing individual sks wildentiy the risks that are important othe
poject's success. This process isillustrated in Figure 6-2.

Prioritize Risks

Figure 6-2. The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant


63.1 Select Risk Characteristics that Define Risks’ Importance

(Qualtatve risk analysis tols provide ways to distinguish those risks that are important for response of
further analysis from those that are less important. The criteria that make a sk of interest o management are
‘agreed upon in advance and implemented in the tools used, Output rom qualitative risk analysis tools includes
2 listing of risks in priority order or in priority groups (high, moderate, and iow.

‘The toos for qualitative risk analysis allow the organization or projct stakeholders to speciy those levels
‘or combinations of risk characteristics that make a particular risk finterest to management. Most tols assess
risk’ importance ftom a combination of probability of occurrence and degree of impact on objectives.

63.2 Collect and Analyze Data

Assessment of individual risk is based on information collected about them. Therefore, data collection
‘and evaluation toos, ncuding interviews, workshops, and reterences to databases of prior project, require
management support and attention. tis important to protect agaist basin data gathering, whichis important
‘when relying on expert judgment forthe information.

6.3.3 Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Specific Objectives

Some tools permit distinguishing a risk’ priory in terms ofthe afected objective. This capably provides
2 list of risks that are important fr any specific objective of interest to management. Tiss useful since it is
‘common for risks to have uneven impacts on varius project objectives.

6.3.4 Prioritize Risks by Probability and Impact on Overall Project

‘There are reasons for constructing measure ofa specific risks importance tothe entre project as
contrasted with its importance to specific objectives. A common reason is fr ease of communication with
management and other stakeholders. When single risk prioritization index i needed the organization should
be explicit about how that index is created. Usually the index reflects the organization's preference among
‘objectives. The technique for creating the overall isk priority measure shouldbe documented in the Plan Risk
Management process.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

63.5 Categorize Risk Causes

Categorzing risks appropriately may lead to improved analysis of the probabiity and magnitude of
project risk and to effective responses. Understanding the relationships between risks may provide a better
understanding ofthe possibilty and magnitude of project risk than if sks are only considered as separate
‘and independent events, Identifying common rot causes ofa group of risks, for instance, may reveal both the
magnitude ofthe risk event fo the group as@ whole alongwith effective strategies that might address several
risks simultaneously. Alternatively, some risks may be inked with others ina causal cain, and understanding
the chain of risks may lead toa better understanding of the implication of risk forthe project. dentiyng risks
that can occur at the same time or using the same resources for recovery might provide a realistic picture of
problems of risk mitigation using scarce resources.

Combining the results ofthe Perform Qualitative Rsk Analysis process with the risk breakdown structure
(see identity Risks, Chapter 5) can show clusters of priory risks arising from specific sources. combination
ofthe sk analysis information with the work breakdowm structure (WBS) can show which areas ofthe project
exhibit the most risk. Assessing the high-priority risks’ impact on one objective, such asthe schedule, may
indicate which aces to address to reduce that objectives uncertainty ll ofthese approaches can contribute
to the realism and usefulness ofthe qualitative risk analysis

6.3.6 Document the Results of the Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis Process

‘The Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis process ads structure to thelist of undifrentated risks (se ldentity
Risks, Chapter 5) into categories of priory. Prortes are usually based on te risks probablity of occuring
‘and its potential impact on spectc project objectives or on the whole project. Each identified risk is assigned
2 priory, perhaps by objective or forthe entire project. This information is usually stored inthe risk register
hich i easy to use and update with new information. The risk register Ist of prioritized risks is posted tothe
project participants wio are responsible for further analysis or action to improve the project pan. Risks that
‘are judged to have high priory are segregated fr further analysis and response planning and are generally
monitored frequently. Risks of low priority to the project may be placed on a watch ist and ae reviewed less
cotten for changes in their status.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant


CHAPTER 7
PERFORM QUANTITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS

7.4 Purpose and Objectives of the Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis Process

‘The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process provides @ numerical estimate ofthe oeralletfect of risk on
the objectives of the project, based on current plans and information, when considering risks simultaneously.
Results from this type of analysis can be used to evaluate the lkenood of success in achieving project
objectives and to estimate contingency reserves, usually for time and cost that are appropiate to both the risks
‘and the risk tolerance of project stakeholders.

itis generally accepted that analyzing uncertainty inthe projet using quantitative techniques such as,
Monte Carlo simulation may provide mare realism in the estimate of the overall project cost or schedule
than a non-probabilistc appreach wich assumes thatthe activity durations or line-item cost estimates are
deterministic Howeveritshouldbe recognized that quanttativeriskanalysisisnotalways equitedor appropriate
for all projects. For example, qualitative risk analysis may provide enough information for development of
effective risk responses, especial or smaller projects. Therefore, during the Pian Risk Management process,
the benefits of quantitative risk analysis should be weighed against the effort required to ensure thatthe
additional insights and valu justty the additional efort

Paria risk analyses, such as qualitative isk analysis aim at prortizing individual risks viewed one ata time
‘and therefore cannot produce measures of overall project risk when all risks are considered simultaneously.
Calculating estimates of overall project risks the focus ofthe Perfrm Quantitative Risk Analysis process.

Specitic project risks are usualy best understood and quantified at a detailed level such asthe line-item
cost or schedule act level. By conrast, project objectives such as achievement ofthe project's budget or
the schedule ae specified at higher evel, often at the level ofthe total project. An overal isk analysis, such
as one that uses quantitative techniques estimates the implication of ll quantified risks on project objectives,
‘The implementation of overall isk analysis using quantitative methods requires:

© Complete and accurate representation of the project objectives built up from individual project
elements. Examples of these representation include the project schedule or cost estimate,

+ lentityng risks on individual project elements such as schedule activities o ine-tem costs at 2
love of detail that lends itself to specific assessment of individual risks.

+ Including generic sks that have a broader effect than individual projet elements,

+ Aopyng a quantitative method (such as Mate Carlo simulation or decision ree analysis thatincoporates
multiple sks simutaneousy in determining overalimpact on the overall project objective.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

Results of the quantitative analysis will be compared to the project plan (baseline or curent) to give
management an estimate ofthe overall project risk and wil answer important questions such as:

Whats the probability of meeting the projec’ objectives?

+ How much contingency reserve (e.g, reserves or buffers of time, resources, and cost is needed to
provide the orgaization withthe level of certainty it requires based upon its risk tolerance?

What are those parts of the project, such as line-item cost or schedule activites, which contribute
the mast risk when al risks are considered simultaneously?

Which individual risks contribute the most to overall project risk?

Estimating overall project sk using quantitative methods helps distinguish those projects where quantied
risks threaten objectives beyond the tolerance of the stakeholders, rom those for which the objectives are
within acceptable tolerances even when risk is considered. The former may be targeted for vigorous risk
‘responses aimed at protecting those objectives mast important to the stakeholders

‘Ahigh-level comparison of quantitative and quailative risk analysis processes is presented in Figure 7-1.

1 Rosresses naval ks ‘Presets ial project outcomes
‘escrigtiey bated on combed eflectso isks
‘Assesses he cscreteprobabty ‘Uses prota citron

ot cturtence and mpact oo characterize the ik’ probably
objectives i oes our andimpact

= Piiiaesndvual ks for ‘Uses project motel (schedule,
subsequent reatnont cos estimate)

Aas ok reiter

‘Leas to quantative isk ansis
‘Estates ikelinoad of meting
targets and contingency ede to
acheve deed level cmon
‘ident risks win greatest eect
on vera project isk

Figure 7-1. Comparison of Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches

7.2 Critical Success Factors for the Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis Process

Success in achieving the objectives of quantitative risk analysis depends explcily on atleast the factors
eserived in Sections 7.2.1 through 7.2.6.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

ESCH MALE 7

7.2.1 Prior Risk Identification and Qualitative Risk Analysis

‘The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process occurs after the Identity Risks and Perform Qualitative
Risk Analysis processes have been completed. Reference toa prorized list of identified risks ensures
that the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process will consider al significant risks wen analyzing their
effects quantitatively

7.2.2. Appropriate Project Model

‘An appropriate model of the project should be used as the basis for quantitative risk analysis. Project
models most frequently used in quanttatve risk analysis include the project schedule (fr time, line-item
cost estimates (for cost decision tree (or decisions inthe face of uncertainty) and other toal-project models.
‘Quantitative risk analysis is especialy sensitive tothe completeness and correctness of the made of the
project thats use,

7.23 Commitment to Collecting High-Quality Risk Data

Often high-quality data about risks are not avaliable in any historic database and should be gathered
by interviews, workshops, and other means using expert judgment of those present. Colecton of rik data
requires resources and time as well as management support

7.24 Unbiased Data

‘Success in gathering risk analysis data requires the ability to recognize when biases occur and combating
‘hat bias or developing other unbiased sources ofthe data. Bias in risk data can occur for many reasons, but
‘wa common sources of bia are cognitive bias and motivational bia.

7.25 Overall Project Risk Derived from Individual Risks

‘The Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process is based upon a methodology that correctly derives the
‘overall project risk from the individual risks. Inrsk analysis of cost and schedule, fr example, an appropriate
method is Monte Carlo simulation. decision tree is an appropriate method fr making decsions when future
events are not certain, using the probability and impact of all risks, and combining ther efecto derive an
‘overall project measure such as value or cost. In eac of these methods, the rsks ae specified atthe evel
othe detailed tasks o ine-tem costs and incorporated into the made ofthe project to calculate effects on
objectives such as schedule or cost forthe entre project, by combining those risks.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

7.2.6  Interrelationships Between Risks in Quantitative Risk Analysis,

‘Altenton should be given to the possibility thatthe individual risks inthe project model are related to
ech athe. For example, several risks may have @ common root cause and therefore ae likely to occur
together. This possibly is sometimes addressed by correlating the risks that are related, ensuring that
they generally occur together during the analysis. Another common way to represent the rsks which occur
together is by using the risk register listing of the risk or root cause and attaching it to several project
elements such as schedule activities or cost elements. When a particular risk occurs, the affected elements
wil all experience the effect ofthat risk together.

7.3 Tools and Techniques for the Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis Process

Tools and techniques used appropriately for quantitative risk analysis have several characteristics, as
follows:

7.3.1 Comprehensive Risk Representation

Risk models permit representation of many if not all, ofthe risks that have impact on an objective
simultaneously. They also permit the representation of both opportunities and threats to the project's
objectives,

7.3.2. Risk Impact Calculation

‘Quantitative models factate the correct calculation af the efect of many risks, which are typically identied
‘and quantified at level of detail below te total project, on the project objectives, which ae typical described
atte level ofthe total project.

7.3.3 Quantitative Method Appropriate to Analyzing Uncertainty

Probability models use a quantitative method that addresses uncertainty. Specifically, the methods should
be able to handle the way uncertainty is represented, predominantly as probabil of an event's occurring r as
probably distributions for a range of outcomes. A good example ofthis i the use of Monte Caro simulation
tools that permit the combination of probability distribution of ine-tem costs or schedule activity durations,
many of which are uncertain,

7.3.4 Data Gathering Tools

Data gathering tools used this proces include assessment of historical data and workshops, interviews,
‘questionnaires to gather quantified information —for example onthe probability of ask occurring probability
istioution of its potential impacts on castor time, or relationships such as correlation between risks.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

ESCH MALE 7

7.35 Effective Presentation of Quantitative Analysis Results

Results from the quantitative tools are general not available in standard deterministic projet management
methods such as projet scheduling or cost estimating. Examples ofthese ae the probability distribution of
project completion dates of total costs andthe expected value ofa project decison. These results, whe all
risks are considered simultaneously, include the folowing

+ Probability of achieving a project objective such as finishing on ime or within budget

+ Amount of contingency reserve in cost, time, o resources needed to provide a required level of
confidence.

* entity or location within the project model of the mast important risks. An example of this is @
sensitivity analysis in a cost risk analysis or a cricalty analysis in a schedule rsk analysis.

‘The elements ofa quantitative risk analysis are ilystrated in Figure 7-2.

(e.g., Monte Carlo simulation,
Decision Tree Analysis)

Project Model

(e@., schedule, cost estimate)

‘+ How likely is success?
‘+ How much contingency?

‘= Which risks are high priority?

Figure 7-2. Structure of a Quantitative Risk Analysis

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

7.3.66 Iterative Quantitative Risk Analysis

‘The success ofthe Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis process s enhanced the processis used periodically
‘throughout the project is impossible to know in advance all ofthe risks that may occur ina projet. ten
‘quantitative risk analysis should be repeated as the project proceeds. The frequency of this effort will be
determined durin the Plan Fisk Management process but wil also depend on events within the project itself
{see Monitor and Control Risks, Chapter 9),

7.3.7 Information for Response Planning

Cverall project contingency reserve in time and cost shouldbe reflected in the project's schedule and
‘budget. Quantitative risk analysis provides information that may be used to modify the project plan. I
the overall isk to time and cost indicates that an adjustment in scope is needed, the scope changes are
‘agreed upon and documented and a new quantitative risk analysis is carried out to reflect the new aspects
ofthe project.

7.4 Documenting the Results of the Perform Quantitative Risk
Analysis Process

‘The contingency eserves calculated in quantitative projec cost and schedule risk analysis are incorporated,
respectively, into the cost estimate and the schedule to establish a prudent target and a realistic expectation
forthe project. Contingency reserves may aso be established to provide forthe capture of opportunites that
‘ate judged tobe priorities forthe project. the contingency reserve required exceeds the ime or resources
available, changes in the project scope and plan may result.

‘Aso, te results ofthe analysis may provide more or less urgency to risk response (see Plan Rsk Responses,
Chapter | depending onthe probably of achieving the plan's objectives or the amount of contingency reserve
required to provide the necessary level of confidence. The results ofa quantitative risk analysis are recorded
‘and passed on tothe person and/or group responsible for project management within the organization for any
further actions required to make full use ofthese resis.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

CHAPTER 8
PLAN RISK RESPONSES

‘The Plan Risk Responses process determines effective response actions that are appropriate to the priority
of the individual sks and tothe overall project risk. It takes into account the stakeholders’ risk attudes and
the conventions specified inthe Risk Management Plan, in addition to any constrains and assumptions that
ere determined when the risks were identified and analyzed.

8.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Plan Risk Responses Process

‘The objective ofthe Plan Risk Responses process iso determine the set of actions which most enhance the
chances of project success while complying with applicable organizational and project constrains

Once risks have been identified, analyzed, and priorized, plans shouldbe developed for addressing every
risk the project team considers tobe sufcienty important, either because ofthe threat poses to the project
objectives oF the opportunity it offers. The planning entails agreing upon the actions to be taken and the
potential changes to budget, schedule, resources, and scope which these actions might cause.

Contingent isk response actions need tobe executed a the optimum time. Fr this reason, the response
specification foreach such risk should include a description of any corresponding tigger conditions.

‘The responsibly for monitoring the project conditions and implementing the corresponding actions should
‘be clearly assigned. Every risk should have been allocated toa risk over as part ofthe Kentiy Risks process,
‘and each of the corresponding rsk responses should now be asigned oa specific isk action owner. The risk
‘owner is responsible for ensuring thatthe risk responses effective and fr planning addtional isk responses
if equied, whereas the risk action owner is responsible for ensuring thatthe agreed-upon rsk responses are
carried out as planned, na timely manne. The role ofthe sk owner and that of the risk ction owner may be
assigned toa single person,

Responses, when implemented, can have potential effects on the project objectives and, as such, can
‘generat aditonal risks. These are known as secondary rsks and have tobe analyzed and planned for in the
same way as those risks which were intial identified.

[tis never feasible or even desirable to eliminate al treats from a project. Similarly, thee is also a init
to the extent to which opportunities can be proactively managed. There may be residual risks tat will remain
after the responses have been implemented, These residual risks should be clearly identified, analyzed,
documented, and communicated to all relevant stakeholders,

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

‘A the approved, unconditional actions arising from risk response planing shouldbe integrated into the
projet management plan in order to ensue that they ae cried out as pat of normal project implementation The
corresponding organizational and project management rules should also be invoked, including the following:

* Project change management and configuration contol
Project planning, budgeting, and scheduling;

+ Resource management; and

+ Project communication panning,

8.2 Critical Success Factors for the Plan Risk Responses Process

‘Arange of factors are important forthe succes ofthe Plan Rsk Responses process. These are described

‘Speci timing of responses

Critical Success Factors for Risk Response Planning

Figure

82.1 Communicate
(Communication with the various stakeholders should be maintained in an open and appropriate manner. The

resulting plans are disseminated and approval obtained inorder to ensure ful acceptance by al stakeholders.
In addition, if organizational causes of risks, such as culture, attitudes, or disagreements concerning

objectives are present, they should be addressed openly. This may require involving high levels of the
‘organization's management and oer stakeholders.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

822 Clearly Define Risk-t

elated Roles and Responsibilities

‘The risk response success willbe dependent ypon the full support and involvement ofthe project team and
othe stakeholders. The key oles for Project Rsk Management ae thse of isk ower and risk action owner.
[A single risk ower should be assigned to every identified risk, and each agreed-upon risk response should
hhave a single risk action owner. The people withthe corresponding responsibilities shoud be aware of wat is
‘expected of them, and the other project stakeholders should understand and accep the needs and authority
ofthese rates.

Management may take ownership of risks with poltica, organizational causes. in adition, senior
management should approve and track associated risk-elated contingency reserves

8.2.3. Specify Timing of Risk Responses

‘Agreed-upon responses should be integrated into the project management plan and will therefore be
scheduled and assigned for execution. The responses that depend on uncertain conditons should also be
monitored so as tobe performed ifthe conditions warant them.

8.2.4 Provide Resources, Budget, and Schedule for Responses

ach response shouldbe planned in detail in accordance withthe methodology ofthe project and integrated
into the project management plan. This entals estimating the resources, costs, and duration; updating the
‘budget and schedule; obtaining approval from management; and obtaining commitment from the risk owners
‘and risk action owners. Management's role at this stages vital for supporting the project manager in developing
risk responses and authorizing the corresponding resources.

82.5 Address the Interaction of Risks and Responses

Responses may be developed to adress risks related ether by cause and effector by common rot cause
‘Categorization of risks, for example by using tools suchas te risk breakdown structure, affinity diagram, or
‘other categorizing tools, may hep identity and adress tis situation. Ther is aso @ need dutng the Plan isk
Responses process to consider the risks aggregated during the Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis pracess
(eq, ten small, related risks combined may pose @ big risk to the project, and then to develop generic
responses wire possible. Another interaction effect that may occur is when one risk, iit occurs, may affect
the probability or impacto other risks.

Deciding onthe response strategy may require a compromise, since some proposed responses may be
mutualy exclusive or counteproductve. For example mitigating a threat to time could cost money, thereby
increasing pressure on the budget. Risk response planning also needs to tke a holistic view of all proposed
responses and make sure they are coherent.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

‘Te challenge therefore in planning responses to risks isthe need to control the potential effects ofthe
strategy developed fo treating the orginal rik. his is overooked, the total level of threat ina project can
actual increase, or the potential for opportunities can be compromised,

8.2.6 Ensure Appropriate, Timely, Effective, and Agreed-Upon Responses

In general, responses should be appropriate, timely, costettective, feasible, achievable, agreed-upon,
‘assigned, and accepted. Any proposed risk response plan needs to be assessed agains he following criteria:

* Consistency with organizational values, project objectives, and stakeholder expectations;

+ Technical feasibility,

* -Ablty of the project team or risk action owners ouside the project to carry out the corresponting
‘actions; and

* Balance between overall impact ofthe response on the project objectives and the improvement in
the risk profil ofthe project

82.7 Address Both Threats and Opportunities

Risk response planning should combine responses that address the threats as wel as those thet provide
{or opportunities into a single, integrated plan either threats or opportunities are not fully dressed, the
combined set of response strategies will be incomplete and may even be invalid,

8.2.8 Develop Strategies before Tactical Responses

Risk response planning should be carried out in an open-minded manner rather than adopting the first
response that seems to be feasible. The responses shouldbe planned at a general, strategic level and the
sitategy validated and agreed upon, prir to developing the detailed tactical approach,

‘nce the responses have been planned ata strategic level, they shouldbe expandedinto actions the tactical
level and integrated ito the project management plan 9. schedule, budget, and resource assignments). Tis
activity may generate addtional secondary risks, which wil need tobe addressed at this ime.

8.3 Risk Response Strategies

‘The project manager should develop risk response strategies for individual risks, sets of risks, and projec
level risks. An overview ofthe steps in arriving at complete set of responses is given in Figure 8-2.

‘The atfected stakeholders should be involved in determining the strategies. Once the strategies have been
selected, they ned tobe agreed upon by the entity that approves those strategies. There are four strategies
\which address individual sks for threats and opportunites as described in Sections 8.3.1 through 8.3.4 (see
also Fig. 8-2,

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

8.3.1 Avoid a Threat or Exploit an Opportunity

‘This strategy involves taking the actions required to address a threat or an opportunity inorder to ensure
ether thatthe threat cannot occur or can have no etfecton the project, or that the opportunity wil occur and
the project wil be abl to take advantage oft

8.3.2. Transfer a Threat or Share an Opportunity

‘This strategy ental transference to third party thats better positioned to address a particular threat or
‘opportunity.

8.3.3. Mitigate a Threat or Enhance an Opportunity

Mitigation and enhancement are the most widely applicable and widely used response strategies. Here, the
approach i to identity actions that will decrease the probability andor the impact ofa threat, and increase the
probably and/or the impact ofan opportunity.

8.3.4 Accept a Threat or an Opportunity

‘This strategy applies when the other strategies are not considered applicable or feasible. Acceptance entalis
{aking no action unless the sk actualy occurs, in which case contingency or fallback plans may be developed
ead of time, tobe implemented ifthe risk presents ist.

8.3.5 Applying Risk Response Strategies to Overall Project Risk
In ation to responding to individual sks, the four risk response strategies can be applied to address
overall project risk as follows:
+ Cancel the projet, last resort, the overall level of sk remains unacceptable
+ Setup a business structure in which the customer andthe supplier share the sk.

+ Re-pian the projector change the scope and boundaries ofthe project, fr example, by modying the
project priority, resource allocations, delivery calendar, et.

+ Pursue the project despite a risk exposure that exceeds the desired level

8.4 Tools and Techniques for the Plan Risk Responses Process

‘There are four categories of tols and techniques, as follows
* Creat tos to identity potential responses,
* _Decision-support tools for determining the optimal potential response
+ ‘Strategy implementation techniques designed tourna strategy ino action, and
+ Tools to transter control tothe Monitor and Contrl Risks process.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

‘These categories of tools can be used respectively to identity potential responses, select the most
appropriate response, translate strategy into planning, and assign the corresponding actions. The steps
involved in planning risk responses ae shown in Figure 8.2.

8.4.1. Response Identification

Fisk response planning builds onthe available information about the potential risks and aims to determine
the optimal set of responses. Fr ths reason, i should involve subject matter experts and employ creativity
techniques inorder to explore all ofthe options. Project planing and execution techniques are ten required
{evaluate the potential effects of the various options on the project's objectives

8.4.2. Response Selection

(nce the sto potential responses for therishs being addressed established, decsion-supporttechniques
may need tobe applied to select the best possible subset from these responses. The selection process should
‘ake into account the cst ofthe responses, the impact onthe project objectives, uncertainty of outcomes and
the possible secondary and residualrisk. The lent Risks, Perform Quanttative Risk Analysis, and Plan Risk
Responses processes may then need tobe applied to the resultant project management plan andthe residual
‘and secondary risks that it would ental. This trative approach continues unt all ofthe individual risks are
‘deemed acceptable and the overal risks within a predefined threshold

8.4.3. Action Planning

Project planning tools are used totum the chosen strategies nto concrete actions and to integrate these into
‘existing plans. The corresponding actions may be unconitonal(.., integrated into the project management
plan or contingent ona trigger condition and predefined as a contingency response strategy

8.4.4 Ownership and Responsibility Assignment

‘The project manager needs to use resource assignment processes to ensure the avaliablty ofan owner for
each risk and fr each response action, so that each associated risk is managed and each corresponding risk
‘response is carried out in a timely and effective manner.

“To enable isk monitoring to identity the imminence r actual occurence of the corresponding event, every
contingency response strategy should include a set of trigger conditions. The responsibility for monitoring
‘these conditions should be leary assigned in the Plan Risk Responses process and managed inthe Monitor
‘and Control Risks process.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘The strategic definition of isk responses should include measurable citeria for success ofthe response
Risk action awmers should monitor their asigned risk, take agreed-upon actions as required, and provide
the risk onners with relevant information on status or changes to the rik characteristics. Risk overs should
assess the effectiveness of any actions, decide wheter addtional actions are required, and keep the project
manager informed ofthe situation.

Plan Risk Responses

Yes

Update Project
Management Plan

Figure 8-2. The Steps Involved in Planning Risk Responses

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

8.5 Documenting the Results of the Plan Risk Responses Process

Risk response planing is based on the information paced inthe risk register during execution of the
Identity Risks and Perform Analysis processes. The corresponding rsk response information is often referred
tos the risk response pan, although it may in fact bean integral pat ofthe isk register.

85.1 Add Risk Responses to the Risk Register

‘The respanse-related information fr each risk is recorded in the risk register and updated regularly. Any
interested stakeholder shouldbe able to rapidly access al the information required to verily ther responsibilities
‘and manage the risk in accordance withthe risk response plan. The set of residual risks and their priorities
‘ate leary identified and recorded

8.5.2 Add Corresponding Risk Responses to the Project Management Plan

While developing the detailed set of risk responses, the project-reated implications are evaluated for
inclusion in a modified project management plan. These include costs, resource assignments, scheduling
etal, and changes to project dacumentaton. Until these changes are formally approved along withthe
‘additional risks that they may cary, risk response planning cannot be considered complet.

85.3 Review and Document Predicted Exposure

(nce the risk responses have been defined and integrated into the project management pan, the ndvidual
‘and overall esiual risks related to this plan are evaluated in order to determine whether addtional response
planning is required, as shown in Figure 8-2. This evaluation shoud provide an estimate of bth the expected
post-response situation and the potential improvement of the risk exposure assuming that the proposed
responses af elective. The evaluation shoud be documented,

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

CHAPTER 9
MONITOR AND CONTROL RISKS

‘The effectiveness of Project Risk Management depends upon the way the approved plans are carted out.
‘These plans should be executed correctly reviewed, and updated regulary. If this is carted out corectl the
invested effort willbe rewarded and future projects will benefit from this projets experience.

9.1 Purpose and Objectives of the Monitor and Control Risks Process

‘The primary objectives of risk monitoring and controling ae to tack identified risks, monitor residual sks,
identity new risks, ensure that risk response plans are executed atthe appropiate time, and evaluate their
effectiveness throughout the project ie cycle.

In addition to tracking and managing the risk response actons, the effectiveness of al of the Project
Risk Management processes shouldbe reviewed to provide improvements tothe management ofthe curent
poject as well as future ones.

For each risk or set of risks for wich a contingent response has been defined, the corresponding set of
‘rigger conditons should have been specified. tis the responsibilty of the action owner to ensure that these
conditions ate etectivly monitored and thatthe coresponding actions are carried out as defined, in a timely

(nce the Plan Risk Responses process is complet, all ofthe approved unconditional response actions
should have been included and defined in the curent project management plan. The first action of risk
‘monitoring and controling i to check whether this isthe case and take any appropriate acon if necessary,
‘such as invoking the change management process with respect to any missing actions. This wil then ensure
‘that the agreed-upon actions are caried out within the normal project execution framework,

‘The risk ovmers and risk action owners need to be briefed on any changes that may affect their
esponsiblities. Effective communication needs to be maintained between them and the project manager so
thatthe designated stakeholders accept accountability for controling th potential outcomes of speci risks,
apply their best efforts to track the associated trigger conditions and cary out the agreed-upon responses in
timely manne.

In addition tothe response actions and trigger conditions, a mechanism for measuring the effectiveness
othe response is provided by the Plan Risk Responses process. The rsk action owner should keep the risk
‘owner aware ofthe status ofthe response actions so that the risk ower can decide when the risk has been
effectively dealt with or whether addtional actions need tobe planned and implemented,

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

‘As the project progresses, additional information becomes avaiable and the project environment may
change as some risks occur, whether foreseen of unforeseen, and others become or cease to be relevant.
‘The planning should therefore be kept current and the projet manager should ensure that periodic risk
reassessment, including risk identification, analysis, and response planing, is repeated at reasonable intervals,
orn response to project events —without generating excessive administrative ovetead. Typical reasons for
risk reassessment are:

* Occurrence of a major or unexpected risk,
+ Need to analyze a complex change request,

+ Phase end review,

+ Project e-planning or major plan elaboration, and

* Periodic review to ensure thatthe information remains curent.

In the event of major organizational changes, rsk management planning may need tobe revisited prior to
reassessing the risks.

In ation tothe regular status reviews, periodic audits shouldbe performed to determine strenaths and
weaknesses in handing risks within the project. This should entail identifying any barriers to effectiveness or
‘keys to success in sk management, recognition of which coud lead to improvements in isk management of
the current or future projects

‘AL the end ofthe project, an integrated analysis ofthe risk management process shouldbe caried out
with a focus on long-term pracess improvements. This analysis consolidates the findings of the periodic
ucts to identify lessons that would be applicable in general toa large proportion of the organization's
projects inthe future, such as appropriate levels of resources, adequate time forthe analysis, use of tools,
level of deal et.

AL project closure, the project manager should ensure that a description has been given ofthe closure of
every risk inthe rsk register, for example: a) did not accu; fo) occurred and contingency plan invoked a (c)
‘curred and impact to the projet scope (etme, cost, and qual.

‘The output ofthe aut ofthe rsk management process should be consolidated with spectc information
with respect to the project's experience of risks, and any generally applicable guidelines for the organization
should be highlighted and potential actions proposed for applying them. This can lead to an update tothe
corresponding organizational process assets.

‘An overview of the steps involved inthe Monitor and Control Risk process i given in Figure 9-1.

‘Gz Pret Manapenent tl Pace Sands fr Prt Ao Managemen

Risk Response Monitoring

Project
Management Plan

Risk
Register,

‘Additional
risk
information

Stakeholder
‘Communications

Tavoke ) [Perform adduonal
contingency | | risk Wonttoeton, Lessons
pare | | “anata end

response planning

Risk Response Control

Integrated Change Control

Figure 9-1. Schematic Representation ofthe Monitor and Control Risks Process

9.2 Critical Success Factors for the Monitor and Control Risks Process

Citical success factors relate to maintaining risk awareness throughout the project and include the
characteristics and capabiities detailed in Sections 9.2.1 through 92.3,

9.2.1 Integrate Risk Monitoring and Control with Project Monitoring and Control

From the star, the project management plan should include the actions required to monitor and contr
project risk This should be set up early in the project planning cycle, and then adjusted in view of the risk
response planing decisions adding, for example, the actions associated with monitoring specific conditions
‘or metres. Once risk response planning has been carried ou, the project schedule should include all ofthe
_2greed-upon,response-related actions so that they can be carted out as a normal part of project execution
and tracked accordingly.

©2009 Roe nape se,


9.2.2 Continuously Monitor Risk Trigger Conditions

Fisk response planing vill have defined a set of actions tobe catid aut as part of the project schedule
2 well as actions whose execution is dependent on a predefined trigger condition. Checking for spectcally
defined risks that may trigger conditional responses isthe responsibilty ofthe risk action owner, in close
colaboration with the sk owner under the overall authority ofthe project manager.

9.2.3 Maintain Risk Awareness

Fisk management reports shouldbe a regular item on every status meeting agenda to ensure that alleam
‘members remain aware ofthe importance of sk management and to ensure that itis fly integrated into all,
ofthe project management decisions.

‘The projects senior-level sponsor should require egular reports on the risks and the planned responses
to ensure tat stakeholders are aware ofthe importance of keeping a focus on risk. Sponsor feedback also
motivates te projet team by demonstrating senior-level interest in Projct Risk Management,

Stakeholders’ perception of the effectiveness of risk management is conditioned in part by the way in
\which risks are handled as they occu, and by the number or characteristics of such evens. Its therefore
Crucial, whenever a sk occurs, that information about the event, as well a the progress and effectiveness of
the responses, be communicated at regular intervals and in an honest manner adapted tothe needs of each
stakeholder. This shouldbe supported by a well-executed communication plan

9.3 Tools and Techniques for the Monitor and Control Risks Process

In addition to standard project management monitoring and control capabilies, risk monitoring and
controling requires a focus on the tools which wil support its key success factors for tracking overall risk as
well as individual risks.

9.3.1 Managing Contingency Reserves

Reserves may have been allocated separately to cover time-telated and cost-relted risks. Techniques
‘are required that allow the proect manager to assess at any point in the project whether these provide the
required level of confidence in the success ofthe project.

‘Tools for managing time butfers should be closely integrated ito the projets scheduling techniques,
whereas those for managing cost should be compatible withthe financial practices. Tools are required to
identity trends and forecast future outcomes to determine wether the reserves will emain sufficient. Tools
‘ate also required fr tracking progress and spending in a consolidated manner.

‘Gz Pret Manapenent tl Pace Sands fr Prt Ao Managemen

9.3.2. Tracking Trigger Conditions

“Tigger conditions and the corresponding metrics are defined during the Plan Risk Responses process
Tools are required to evaluate and track these conditions agains the projet baseline or specified thresholds,
‘based on actual status. They can be chosen to provide information on risks related tothe deliverables, suchas
performance, as wel as on project-elated features, such as time and cost

93.3 Tracking Overall Risk

‘Tools are require inorder to determine as the project progresses, wether the responses are having the
‘expected effect onthe project's overall level of risk.

9.3.4 Tracking Compliance

In order to monitr the quality of the execution ofthe rsk-elated plans and processes, a set of quality
metrics such as degree of variation from the baseline, should be tracked and recorded. These metrics will,
‘normally have been defined inthe risk management plan,

9.4 Documenting the Results of the Monitor and Control Risks Process

‘The final conto action of sk monitoring and controling to record actual data for future use. Thisincludes
allof the relevant information relating to risk management from start fish ofthe project. The definition of
what this information must include, 3s wel a the storage mechanism, should have been previously spected
inthe risk management plan

‘The goals to ensue that te significant risk management information is recorded to provide concrete data
to the lessons leamed praces for inclusion ina lessons leaned document, repr, or ether communication
vehicle. Typical information includes the folowing:

* For each identified risk or type of risk, whether i eccurred, and, ifs, when and how often ll
‘elevant data shouldbe recorded: impact, effectiveness of detection and of response, and any
‘unplanned, adalitonal actions that were caried out.

* Effectiveness of avoidance or exploitation actions,
+ Effectiveness of transfer and sharing actions
+ Unexpected or undocumented risks which occurred and data about them,
+ Effectiveness of rik mitigation and enhancement actions.
+ Occurence of accepted treats or opportunites.
Consolidated information should be provided onthe level of effort expended. Costs and benefits tothe
Doct of risk management activites should also be provided

‘This information will need to be archived and indexed in @ manner that wil acitate etieval for easy
‘evew during the project, at closure, and for future projects, when the need arises.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant


APPENDIX A

GUIDELINES FOR A PMI PRACTICE STANDARD

A.1 Introduction

‘API practice standard is characterized as follows:

Each practice standard provides guidelines on the mechanics (eg, nuts and bolts, basic,
fundamentals, step-by-step usage guide, how i operates, how to do it) of some significant process
{Gnpu, too, technique, or output that is relevant o a project manage.

‘Apractice standard does not nevessarly miro the life-cycle phases of many projects; however, an
individual practice standard may be applicable to the completion of one or more phases within a
project

[A practice standard doesnot necessarily mirror the Knowledge Areas within A Gude to the Project
Management Body of Knowledge (PHBOK® Guide-Fourth Editon, athough an individual practice
standard will provide sufficient detail and background for one or more of the input, tools and
techniques, and/or outputs. Therefore, practice standards are not required to use the name of any
Koowiedge Area

Each practice standard should include information on what the significant proces is and does,
‘hy iis significant, how to perform if, when it shouldbe performed, and if necessary for further
latfication, who should perform it

Each practice standard shoud inude information that is accepted and applicable for mast projets
‘mast ofthe tie witin the projact management community. Processes that are general restricted or
applicable to one industry, county, or companion profession (ean application area) may be included
2s an appench for informational purposes, rather than as part ofthe practice standard. With strong
‘support and evidence, an application area-specfic process may be considered as an extersion practice
standard, inthe same manner as extensions othe PMBOK® Guide-Fourth Edton are considered.

Each practice standard wil benef from the incision of examples and templates, is best when an
‘example or template indudes a discussion of is strengths and weaknesses A background description
may be necessary to put this discussion nthe appropriate context The examples shouldbe aligned wit
‘he relevant information inthe standard ort appendix and placed in proximity to that information.

‘Al practice standards shall be written in the same general style and forma

Each practice standard project wil be aligned wth or reference other practice standards, as needed
Each practice standard wil be consistent wit the PMBOK® Guide-Fourth Edition.

Each practice standard i intended tobe more prescriptive than the PMBOK® Guide-Fourth Editon,

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant


APPENDIX B

EVOLUTION OF PMI’S PRACTICE STANDARD FOR
PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT

B.1 Pre-Project

In early 2005, Pl began exploration for developing the ist Practice Standard for Project Risk Management.
Focus would be placed on single project risk management fora single project rater than including programs.
‘or patflos of projects, with close coupling tothe Project Fisk Management section ofA Guide fo the Project
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide) ~ Third Edition. By April 20, 2006, the PMI Standards
Members Advisory Group (MAG) approved the following final charter forthe standard, with Cynthia A. Ber,
PMP, as the Project Manager, and Or. David Hulett as the Deputy Project Manager. The charter included the
{allowing characteristics forthe standard

+ Provides information on Project Risk Management that includes information that is clear, complete,
relevant, and generaly recognized as good practice on most projects most ofthe time.

+ Is consistent with the PMBOK® Guide —Thrd Edition, expanding but not contradicting, the concepts
‘and techniques related to Project Risk Management, and keeps within the limits and practices of
Project Risk Management as described within Chapter 11 ofthe PMBOK® Guide Third Eton,

‘Has been reviewed and updated by the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management
Project Team,

+ Is wtten for project management practitioners and othe stakeholders ofthe project management
profession.

Describes the processes that are unique to Project Risk Management,

+ Includes in an appendix, examples and templates of specific Project Risk Management processes,
tools, and/or techniques addressed in the practice standard, wit discussion oftheir strengths and
weaknesses, including background description that put the relative strengths and weaknesses into
context.

* Uses the PMBOK® Guide ~Third Edition Glossary a the starting point of its glossary, and does not
contain contradictions.

+ Uses a glossary term inthe text without definition or adltonal explanation.

+ {Is aligned with and does not contradict other PM! standards.

* Fallows the Pll Style Gude, is written in North American English, translatable to PM oficial
languages, and is sensitive to cultural issues.

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

a) Arenove 8

* Can be approved as PMI standard, which means that n aditon tothe content being acceptable,
the process for selecting team members and soliciting and responding to comments onthe product
must be open and incusive.

B.2 Preliminary Work

In recognition that risk management is not practiced well on many projects, the project team set out to
identity practices that are viewed as best practices, as those are understood, and applied inmost successully
managed projects most of the time.

‘The project core team was initaly formed in the fal of 2005 and consisted of; Dr. David Hilson PMP, Kk
Piney, and ris Persun.

B.3 Scope Changes

During the time the project was chartered, the PMIBOK® Guide ~ Fourth Elton was commissioned. As a
result, the charter ofthe Practice Standard for Project Risk Management was expanded to be consistent and
‘non-contraditory with that standard

B.4 Exposure and Consensus

‘The standard was submitted as an exposure draft inthe winter of 2007, and expased on 23 March 2008,
‘There were 849 comments. The team’s comment acceptance ate (comments accepted ought and accepted
with modifications) was 57%. The PMI Standards Manager submitted the resultant final draft, with the
Concurrence ofthe Pil Standards Program MAG, tothe Pll Standards Program Consensus Body for oficial
‘allot on 27 March 2008. Twenty-eight members of the PMI Standards Program Consensus Body agreed fo
participate inthe ballot ofthe Practice Standard fo Project Risk Management. Those not participaing included
the PM and Deputy PM fr this standard because their participation was considered a conflict of intrest. The
balloting period was closed on 25 April 2009 with 23 ballots returned. Consensus Body voting results were
28 follows: 22 affirmative and 1 affirmative with comment. The afimative with comment pertained to future
revisions of the standard and possible improvements tothe comment adjudication process.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

APPENDIX C

CONTRIBUTORS AND REVIEWERS OF THE PRACTICE STANDARD
FOR PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT

‘This appendix lists, alphabetically witin groupings, those individuals who have contributed to the
evelopment and production of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management. No simple Ist or even
rmulpe lists can adequately convey all the contributions of those wh have volunteered to develop the Practice
Standard for Project Rsk Management.

‘The Project Management institute is grateful to all ofthese individuals for their support and acknowledges
their contbutions tothe project management profession.

G.1 Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Project Core Team

‘The following individuals served as members, were contributors of text or concepts, and served as leaders
within the Projet Core Team (PCT

‘Cynthia Ann Berg, Ph, PMP Project Manager

David. Hulett, PhO, Deputy Project Manager

Dr. David Hilson FRSA, FIRM.

XcistinePersun, MA, PMP

tipi “Ki” Piney, BSc, PMP

Kcistin Lite, Standards Project Specialist

Nan Wolslayer, AStd, Standards Compliance Specialist

C.2 Significant Contributors

In aditon tothe members of the Project Core Team and the Sub-Team Leaders, the folowing individuals
provided significant input or concepts:

Jeannette Horne

‘Gaica ret Manganese, ace Sead fr Pret i Meagan

| Arrenoiec

C.3 Practice Standard for Project Risk Management Team Members

In addition to those listed above, te folowing individuals participated on the Practice Standard for Project

Fisk Management Project Team.
‘Ahmad Khair Abdul Ghani, PE, MBA ‘che Add, PMP, PhD
Priumada Agarwal, PMP Upinder Aggarwal, PMP
Asif M Ahmad, PMP ‘Ame Nabil Ahmed, PMP, MSc
Jose Correia Alberto, MEng, CTP Salvador Alvarez, PMP
‘Chukwusl Anakudo, PMP Ananthalakshmi Anbuselan
Jagathnarayanan Angyan FIE, CE Rodrig Ariza
Pedro Carlos Auler Michael Avery
Sal Swaminathan Baba Subramanyan,BE,PMP Teddy Alton Barnes
Gall len Bartz David Benfl
Paul S. Bennett Douglas A Berry, PMP
Mamoun Besaiso, CE Timothy Brus
Dave M. Bond Kiron Bondale
Blaine W. Bonwel, MBA, PMP Carlos Eduardo MF. Braga, PMP
Valerie Claire Basse, PMP Joan Browne, BSc, PMP
‘dian Busch, PMP, MBA, John J. Bye, DBA, PMP
.S. Rajan, PMP Eduardo Cadena
Franeo Caron Wiliam G. Chadick, DM, PMP
Souray Chakraborty Harshavardhan Chakravart, 8S
‘Shanthi Chandrasekar Noman Zafar Chaudry, PE, PMP
iy Chauhan, MBA, PMP ‘Subrahmanyam Chinta, VN, PMP
Carolyn Chomik Joan F, Church
‘Glenda Clark Lor line, MBA, PMP
Job. Coles, Phd ‘Anthony R, Corridor, PMP
Coughin, Pitip Nancy A Gygan, MS, PMP
Marco Aurlio Daneion, PMP Karel de Baker, MA, PMP
This De Jong ‘redo Del Cano
Peter B. de Zouza Melo, SPS, PMP Chery L. Dennis
Raveesh Dewan, PMP, MBA Ricardo Jose do Rego Baros, PMP
Job David Driessnack Mat Dubois
Jason Edinger, PMP Malina Ela, MSc, PMP
Norman Epstein, PMP, MBA Joel Erickson
Rodrigo Fernandes Espirito Santo Glovanoi Fanduiz
Genevibve Faragé, PMP Maio Fillo Caranco
Leslie Feder Eduardo Feischer

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘APPENDIX ©

Kirby Frtenbery, PMP
Michelle L. Franklin, PMP
Andrew Fry, CMA, PMP

Nato Gaspar, MSc, PMP

Silvie Hernan Giralde, PMP, CBCP
Vivek Goel, PMP

Serge Goncharov, PMP, PgMP
Priyesh Gopalakrishnan

Steve Grunewald

Sanjay Gupta, PMP

Heidi Ann Hahn, PhO, PMP
Robert W. Harding, PMP
‘Chandrashekar Hassan

David A. Haugh, PMP

‘Amold A il, PMP

George Hopman, PhD, PE

John Humphrey

George Jackelen

Dhanojkumar Jadhav

Stephen Michael Johns

Valeri Jonas, BA (Honours), Oxon
Xcishna Kallapur, PMP

Maya Kehoe

Amir Abed Khir

Konstantinos Kirytopouies, PhD, PMP
‘Nejandro Kowiend

Jeyakumar Kishamoorthy
Polisety Vera Subrahmanya Kumar, CISSP, CISA
iaya Kurada

David Larson

Henry Le

Beard Lindekens

Vasantha R Manda, PMP, ISSP
Rivalino Matias Jc, PhD, MSc
LIME Maxwell MBA, PMP

“ral L. Mcntosh, PMP
Concepcion Merino

Lymn Francis
Tracy Frit

Kamlesh Gandhi, PMP, Pas

Tina Gite, PMP, MPM

Vikram Godbotey

Francisco Gomer

Ronald R.Goaduin, PMP

Robert Grant

Denise M. Guerin

Cfstne Gusméo, PRD

Laurie Hall

Balasubramaniam Hari Gopal, FCA, PMP
Henry Hattenrath

Joho Hendricks, MS, PMP
Rosemarie A. Hilt, MBA, PMP
Sean Hugo

Walter Hussey, PMP

Ramona Jackson

‘Ayo Jem, MS, PMP

Kenneth E. Johnson, MBA, PMP
Roy Josin

Fita Kaul

Rameshchandra B, Ketharaju
Behrad Kiatar

lkka Koskinen, MSc, PMP

RM. Krishna, MBA, CAPM

Lars Kruse

Sasi Kumar, PMP

Elise Labre

Wei Lee, PMP

Guilherme Pereira Lima, PMP
Renato Lourenco da Siva, MBA, PMP
Edmond Matevosian, PE, PMP
Pefia Tores Nestor Mauricio, PMP
Alvis Minty

Ramesh Menon

Philip Mileham

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

Wagar Aimed Mirza
Siddique Motammed

Sergio Monaco, MCTS

Flavio Montenegro, PMP
Linda L. Morgan, MSI, PMP
Tania Morris MPM, PMP

Mark A. Munster PMP, CISA
carlo Muzzare

Rob Nelson, PMP

‘nn Nguyen, PMP

ilian O'Connell, MBA, PMP
‘Armin Opitz, PMP

‘Abhimanyu Parasher, MBA, PMP
‘Scott Paton

Chris Payne, PMP

‘Nexandre Peal

Lavinia Petou, CAPM

Kista Lynn Pizzurro

carl Pro

Sridhar R Pydah, MS, PMP
‘Stephen F Randolph, PMBA PMP
Ccaalne Robison, PMP

Edward Rowe

Joseph Sabatini

Salem Mahaboob Satna Sheri, MBA, PMP
Rudolf Schenker

Bill Schneider

Ravi Shanker, MBA, PMP

Jeff Shore

Maia Isabel Siva Sumano, MBA, PMP
Vivek Sivakumar, CAPM

‘Shaun Smith

Mauro Sole, PMP

Tours Stamatis, PhD PMP
Roeland Stelingwert
Prasanna V Sugavanam, PMP
Mathias Svane, MSc, PMP

APPENDIX C

Shipra Mitra
uilerma Mona Lean
Elizabeth Mejia Montanez
Mohammad Mora
Rick A. Morris, MPM, PMP
‘Saradhi Motamarr, MTech, PMP
Ronan J. Murpy, CEng, MBA
Linda Nechney, PMP

Vaman 6. Nene

Naema Nunnery

Daryl K.Ono

Daniel Pacholski, PMP
David M. Patrick

Meidul Paul

‘Sameer k Penakalapati, ME, PMP
‘Sharon D. Prez-Suarez
Bruce Peto, PMP

Roberto Pons, PMP

Jule R. Purcell, PMP, MCSE
aya Raman, PMP

Jennifer Read, PMP, CMC
Fabiano lim, PMP, PoMP
Don Ruchkall

Fawzia Salahuddin MCS, PMP
‘Sivakumar Sanyasi

Marcio Schmit, PMP
Michael J. Scot, PMP
Viresh C Shah, MBA, PMP
Evandro Siva

Michae! . Simants

Kathy J. Slater, PMP

Linda E.Solorzano, BS, PMP
Mandayam Sram, Meng, PMP
Fred Stein

Jim Stewart, PMP
Ramakrishnan Sundararaman
‘Amin Tabatabayi, MBA, PMP

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘APPENDIX ©

\enerando Tangco, PMP, CSM
Patel Tejesh, PMP

Jacqueline Teo

GGangesh Thakur, CPIM, PMP

Ing. Biagio Tramontana, PMP

Auth H. Vandeget

‘Christoph Verschuere, I, PMP ISM
Yiannis Vithynos, PMP, MSc

Paul Weis Jc, PMP, CPM

Nancy Watanabe

Usa L. Winchester, PMP

James Yang, PMP, MBA

Xianjun Zhou

‘Suresh Kumar Tata, PMP, ACS.
‘Sarma Tekurnalla, PMP, MBA
Michelle Tessier

Vativelu Thanicachatam
‘Subhash B.Tuladhar, PMP

‘ri Pavan Vardan Vemu
Marianne Viegas

‘Steve Watlell

uan-Hsun Wang, PMP

James Wattnem

Karen L Woodruff, RN CFNP, PMP
Lay M. Zakaria, PMP

C.4 Final Exposure Draft Reviewers and Contributors

In addition to team members, the following individuals provided recommendations for improving the
Exposure Draft of the Practice Standard fo Project Risk Management.

Marcos Abreu
José R. Alea G., PMP

Mohd Al-Kuwar

‘Ondiappan Arvazhagan “A”, PMP PMI-RMP
Randall Ash, PMP

Imad Babbil

Emest Baker, PMP

Jerry Bal, PMP

Eng, Dimah M. Baraka, PMP, PM-MP
‘Suvransu Basu, BE

‘Susanne Bode

David J. Baschma PMP BE.

Sergio A. Calvo Abarca, PMP

Marlene Camevali

Bruce C. Chadbourne, PMP, PoMP

Steve Charters MAPM MSo

Tomio Chiba, PMP

Patricia Cohen

Wendra Collet, MPM

Bila S.Dahaby, MS, ISS
‘Gwendolyn Darby

‘nifban Das, MTech, PMP

TerellG. Dorn, PE

Peggy Drew, MBA, PMP

Norberto Figueroa, PMP

Robert A. Dudley, PMP, PML-SP

Scott D. Freaut, PMP, IPMA-D

Mark Gabel, MSCE, PE

‘liver D. Gildersleeve, Jr, PMP, MCTS
Kurt J. Haris, PMP

Jame Healy

Walter Hekala, COA, PMP

Sie Hinton, PMP

Felicia Elizabeth Hong, PMP, MBA
Manuel Huerta

Aisin Hurt

(Christoph Werner Jacobi

Ashok Jin, PMP, ML

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant

‘Syed Asad Jawed CE
Ramesh D. Kandada, member RSIG
Kenneth P Katz PMP
Rameshehandra Ketharaju

‘Gene G. Kuki, PMP

‘Abilash T. Kuzhikat, PMP, ML
Peter Lier

Christopher E. Maddox, PMP
‘Anthony Mampilly, PMP, COP
Srinivas Mandi, PMP, SAP HR
‘Ammar W. Mango, PoMP, PMP
Lamy Marks

‘Andrew MeSlade, PMP

Patick K. Morro, PMP

Rajesh Musaliyath

Eric M. Myers, PMP

Mustapha NAFAA, MPM, PMP
Patrick O'Farrell, PMP, MBA
Lambert. Ofoeghu, PMP, PMI-RIMP
Kazuhiko Okubo, PMP, PE
Keathikeyan Ovura)

Nancy Perosio, PMP

Rafael Pita Quintal

APPENDIX C

Dirk Pons
Carl L Pritchard, PMP, PMI-RIMP

Javier Pumar, PMP

Polisety Veera Subrahmanya Kumar, PMP, PMI-RMP
‘Chandrasekar Ramakrishnan PMP, CSOA
Ivan D.Ramitez ., PMP

‘Nexander Revi, PMP

Pedro C. Ribeiro, MBA, PMP

Bruce P Robison

SSadegh Roozbehi

Tarun Kumar Roy

Bala Selvarju

Hilary Shreter, MBA, PMP

Fay Simcock MSc, PMP

Rebecca Spohn, PMP, COE

Pranay Srivastava, PMP, CSM

Joyce Statz, PhD, PMP

Massimo Torre, Ph, PMP

Fredrick G. Trussell, PMP

Frederick Trussell

Kevin . Wegryn, PM CPM

Wiliam. €. Wencel, PMP

‘Nexey D. Zmin, PME

.5 PMI Standards Member Advisory Group (MAG)

‘Te following individuals served as members ofthe PMI Standards Member Advisory Group (MAG) during
evelopment of the Practice Standard for Project Risk Management.

Julia M. Bednar, PMP
Doulas Crk

Carol Hatday, MA, PMP
Astjom Ralstads, PRD, Ing
Paul. Shalry, PMP

John Zocke, MBA, PMP

vis Cartwright, MPM, PMP
Terry Cooke Davies, PhO FCMI
Deborah O'ray, CIM (Hons)
David W Ross, PMP, PMP
David Violette, MPM, PMP

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

appenonx ic

C.6 Staff Contributors

Special mention is due to the following employees of PML
‘Steven L Fatrenkrog, PMP, VP Regional Development
‘Amanda Fretick, Standards Program Administrator
Auth Anne Guerrero, MBA, PMP, Former Standards Manager
Donn Greenberg, Manager, Publications
Roberta Storer, Product Editor
Barbara Walsh, CAPM, Publications Planner

‘Gaiea Pret agement ne, Pacis Sanaa fr Pret i Menagemant


APPENDIX D

TOOLS, TECHNIQUES AND TEMPLATES FOR
PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT

Many tools and techniques have been developed and are in widespread use to support the Project Risk
Management processes. The most commonly used ofthese are listed inthe following tables along with their
strengths, weaknesses, and erica success factors, Where a technique can be used in more than one Project
Risk Management process, i is described in detail inthe section associated with the main process that it
supports, and refered to as necessary for ther processes to wich ican be of use. Examples and templates
shown after each table provide ilustratons of the most common and good practice uses ofthese tools and
techniques. This information isnot intended to explain the too's and techniques butt ist them with certain
important characteristics. Those who are interested in learning more are encouraged to seek other sources
‘suchas handbooks, textbooks, or courses in project risk management

D.1 Techniques, Examples and Templates for
Risk Management Planning (Chapter 4)

Pian Risk Management defines the approach tobe fllowed for managing the risks throughout the Iifspan
ofthe corresponding project.

D.1.1. Techniques
‘An example of an approach is given in Table D1.

Table D1. Example of Plan Risk Management Approach

(SFs for Effective
‘Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘Application
Pranning Meetings and | Involvement afore |» Depends on Pio isk management

Analysis team members expatence of plan templates
participants ‘Pio stkehalder
analysis
Bist oganizatonal
(guidelines for risk
management

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

a) appenoix 0

D.A.1.1 The Risk Management Plan - Purpose and Typical Content
Depending onthe size and complexity ofthe project, some oral f the following elements wil be present
ina risk management plan
* Introduction
* Project Description
© Project objectives
© Extemal dependencies
© Stakeholder analysis
* isk Management Scope and Objectives
Variance thresholds
(© Prioritization of project objectives
(© Thresholds, weights and other parameters
+ Definition of criteria for “unacceptable threats” and “un-missable opportunities”

+ Impact scales, probability scales, Px matics, weighting of project objectives,
prorization and selection criteria, degree of confidence required for overall risk
{e.g 80° percentile from quantitative risk analysis

+ Risk Management Methodology
© Relationship with te organizational environment
Risk management activities
+ Link tthe project management methodology
+ Relationship wit other project management processes
© Rsk taxonomyitisk breakdown structure either generic or project-specific)
© Format ofa fully defined risk statement description ("metlanguage”)
© Key deliverables
* Risk Management Organization
© Roles, responsibities and levels of authority fr risk management
+ Rules of escalation
© Burlgeting for risk management activities added tothe project budget
+ Adapted tothe complexity and sensitivity ofthe project

© Scheduling of rsk management actives inthe project schedule, i. when certain actions
or reviews need tobe carried out (requency, life cycle elated etc.)

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

appenoix 0 Oa

©. Reporting
+ Goverance-rlated rules of reporting and disclosure
= Use of Tools
© Toot name, description, usage
© Structure ofthe risk database
+ Requirements in terms of system resources
+ Communications Panning
© Documents, usage, ules for distribution (requency,autience, et)
© Document tempiates
Risk epister
Risk status reports

0.1.1.2 Templates Relevant to Risk Management Planning
‘The risk management plan shoud provide a numberof templates for use bythe other processes. These
say include:
+ Formal structure fra risk statement
© Anexample is given below
+ Means of categorizing risks, for example a isk breakdown structure
‘© Anexample is given in the identity Risks section ofthis appendix
+ Definitions, by project objective, of probability and impact scales
© Anexample is given in the Perform Quatatve Risk Analysis section ofthis appendix
+ Fisk prioritization and selection uidtines

‘© These quienes may be used in Perform Quaflave Rik Analysis and in Perform Quantitative
sk Analysis as well asin Plan Risk Response Planing An example is given below.

Status report templates
+ Typical agenda for status meetings
D.1.1.3 Risk Statement “Metalanguage”

In order fo all risks to be cleary defined, a standard structure for the way in which the risk is described
shouldbe specitied and applied. Atypical such statements:

"Because of <one or more causes>, <tsk> might occur, which would lead to <one or more etfects>".

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

D.1.1.4 Risk Prioritization and Selection Guidelines

‘APPENDIX D.

‘The selection and prioritization of sks must be linked to the project objectives. Thersk management plan
will define the relatve importance to be assigned to these objectives (e.9. reliability takes precedence over
time etc): this may bein the form of numerical “weights” that can be applied to crete a single weighted sum
‘overall objectives foreach risk. Any other features that may affect the urgeny of dealing with a risk should
‘also be specified. one linked toa resource that will son disappear shouldbe given greater urgency

D.2 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Identify Risks (Chapter 5)

Identity Risks is caried out inorder to develop a comprehensive lis of ll nowable uncertainties that could
hhavean effect on the project’ objectives.

Table D2. Identity Risks

(SFS for Effective
Technique Strengths, Weaknesses Application
Assumptions & ‘Simple structured Implicithiesen Requires @
(Constants Analysis | approach assumpfions or ‘comprehensive st
‘can be based on constrains are often ‘of assumptions &
‘assumpbons & missed constraints
constrains already
listed in project charter
Generates project:
specticrisks
Brainstorming ‘Allows al patcipants [+ Requires attendance of [+ Attendance of
to speak their mind | key stakeholders ata representative group of
‘and contibute tothe | workshop, therefore can | stakeholders
‘scussion be aifcut to arrange ‘commitment to honesty
Can involve al key and expensive Preparation
stakeholders Prone to Grouptink and | * 5.04 tacit
Creative generation at | other group dynamics =
ideas May produce biased Use of sructye

results dominated by
strong person (often
management)

Often nat wel acitated
‘Generates non-risks
and duplicates, requires
firing

(9. categories or RBS)

‘cause and eet
(shkawa) Diagrams

Visual representation
of project promates
stucture tinking

Diagram can quickly
‘became overcomplex

Etective selection of
crcl impacts 9

by se of sensitivity

analysis)

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘APPENDIX D.
‘able D2. entity Risks (continued)
(OSFs for Effective
‘Technique Strengths Weaknesses. ‘Application
‘Check Lists Captures previous |» Checkiistcan grow to |» Regular maintenance is
expetience ‘become unwieldy required
Presenis dtaled ist | Risks naton the ist wil |» Use of structure can
ofrsks be missed assist (eg, RBS)
+ Often only includes
threats, misses
opportunites
Delphi Technique ‘captures input rom |» Limited to technical risks |» Efecvefcitation
technical experts |» Dependent on actual Carell selection of
Removes souces of | expertise of experts experts
bias May take longer time than | © Clear deinton of scope
avalable duet erations
ofthe experts inputs
Document review ‘poses detaied | Limited to risks ‘Understanding of
project-specific risks | contained in project relevance of prio
Requires no specialist | 6cumentation expetience
tools
FEN aut Tee ‘Structured approach, [Focuses on heats, Detaled description
Analysis well understood by | not so useful for ofthe area being
= see Chapter 7 engineers opportunites assessed
Produces an estimate |» Requies expert tots not |» Statscally accurate
cof overalreiabiity | generally avaiableto | data on fault
using quantitative tols| those except experts probabil for many
{00 tal support events
Force ea Analysis» Creates deep © Time-consuning and |» Priorized objectives
understanding of complex technique
factors that affect | Usual only applied toa
ject objectives single objective, so does.
‘ot provide whoe-pojct|
Industry knowledge |» Captures previous [+ Limited to what has ‘Access to relevant
base experience previously happened Information
‘lows benchmarking | Excudes project-specific
against extemal risks
organisations
(continued)

‘2208 ret Mangement, racice Sana Prt Ak Mags


‘APPENDIX D.
‘able D2. entity Risks (continued)
(SFs for Effective
‘Technique Strengths Weaknesses. ‘Application
Influence ciagrams | Exposeskey iskativers| + Requires disciplined denty key areas to
can generate countr- | thinking assress
Intuitive insights not | © Not aways easy to
valle through other| determine appropriate
techniques stuctue
Interns ‘esses risks Time consuming ‘Good irferviewing and
etal, Raises non-risks, ‘questioning skils
‘Generates noes, sues, wores | © Enironment of tus,
engagement of ec, sorequies fiteing | openness, conientiaty|
stakeholders Preparation
Open relationship
between interviewer
and interviewee
ominal Group ‘Encourages and lows |» Can ead fo rustation in |» Good briefing ofall
Technique allpatcpants to dominant members wo | — partcpants inthe
contribute feelitis moving slowly | technique
‘lows or itferent ‘Stic action
levels of competence
‘in common language
Toa large extent, auto
cueing

Provides ideal base for
aft oigramming

(runing by isk
categres for use in
the Risk Breakaoun
Suture ana Root
Cause Anais)
Post-projectrevews! |» Leverages previous |» Lied oasis tat |» Wel seucred project
Lessons Leamed’ | expotience ave occured previouy | lessons eamed
storcal oration |« Preven making the | Iniomatonis equeny | database
= see Chaptré | samemsiakesor | incomplete detais Participation of previous
missing the same | of past iks may poet team members
cpportunites twice | notincude deta ot | (eal incusing the
Enhances the successiul resolution; | project manager)
‘Orgrizaoal Process | _inefective strategies ae
Assets ‘arly eocumenis
Prompt ists Ensues coverage? |» Topcscanbetoohigh |» Chace of atraerant
altypes of risk level tothe project andits
Stimulates cratvty ervonment

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘APPENDIX D.
‘able D2. entity Risks (continued)
(SFs for Effective
‘Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘Application
Questionnaire Encourages broad | Suocess depends onthe | Clear and unambiguous
thinking to identity ‘qualty ofthe questions | questions
risks + Limited othe topics | + Detailed briefing of
covered by the questons | respondents
+ Canbea simple
‘eformating ofa checist|
isk Breakdown ‘Offers framework for |» None © Requires @
Structure (RBS) ter risk identfcation comprehensive RBS,
techniques suchas often talred tothe
‘brainstorming roject
Ensures coverage of
alltypes of risk
Tess fr blind spots or
Ract-Cause Araysis |» Alows dentication of [+ Mostiskmanagement [+ Aiitytoientiy fa
= see Chapter 6 addtional, dependent | techniques are organized | risks an outcome of
risks by individu risk This | amore fundamental
‘Mlaws the organization | organization i not cause
toidentiy ists conducive to identifying |e Wiingness by
‘hat may be lated | the root causes management to
because oftheir | ® Can oversimplity and accept and adress
commen reatcauses. | hide existence of ther | the root cause rather
Basis for development | potential causes than adopting partial
ofpreremptve and |» There may beno valid | workarounds
compretensive stratgy avaiable for
responses addressing the root
Can serve toreduce | cause once thas been
apparent complexity | identified
‘SWOT Analisis Ensures equal focus | Focuses on intemally |» Good facitation
fonbath threats and | generated ists arising | strict adherence to
opportunites ftom organizational the technique, to avoid
Offersa structured | strengths and confusing the four
approach to weaknesses, excludes | SWOT perspectives
‘identity treats and | external risks (G2. between Strengths
opportunites * Tendsto produce high- | and Opportunites, or
Focus on intemal level generic risks, not | between Weaknesses
(organizational pijec-speciic and Threats)
strengts and
weaknesses) and
‘enteral (opportunities
and threats)
(continued)

‘2208 ret Mangement, racice Sana Prt Ak Mags


APPENDIX D
‘Table D2. lentity Risks (continued)
(SFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses, ‘Application
System Dynamics Exposes unexpected | Requires specialized ‘Understanding of
= see Ghapter715. | iter-elations between} softwar and expertise to| feedback
ject elements ‘ld models ‘Competence in aplying
(fedbeckand feed: | Focuses on impacts tut | — tools and understanding
forward 0095) fico incude the | their output
Can generate counter: | concept of probability 6 Quay of he system
intuit insights nat made
avaliable trough other vy of input
semaves ' ata collected forthe
rogues ovea speci project
Impacts of al incuded pean
evens and risks
WES Review Ensuesallelenenis |» Excudes exiemal asks |» Good WBS
ofthe project scope | or those nat specially
ae considered ‘elated to WBS elements
Provides for risks
related io cferent
levels of detail rom
high-level o those
related oil
work packages)
D.2.1. Techniques

Examples of techniques are given in D.21.1 through 0.2.1.15.

1.2.1.1 Assumptions and Constraints Analysis

‘This technique requires tree steps:

1. Uistassumptions and constraints forthe project

2. Test assumptions and constraints by asking two questions:

‘Could the assumption/consrant be fase?
»b. iitwere fase, would one or more project objectives be affected (positively or negatively)?

3. Where both questions are answered "Yes", generate a risk, for example in the form: <Assumption!
constraint> may prove fase, eaing to <effecton abjectivets)>

‘The results can be documented in table form, as shown in Figure Dt.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

appenoix 0 Oa

t J

Figure D1. Example ofa Constraint Analysis with Fields for Description and Analysis Results,

1.2.1.2 Brainstorming

Brainstorming is commonly used ina factated risk identification workshop to identi risks. The standard
‘ules of brainstorming are often modified wien the technique is applied to risk identification. For example it
is common to structure the risk identification brainstorm using risk categories ra risk breakdown structure.
‘Some evaluation of proposed risks is often included in risk identification brainstorm to remove non-isks. tis
important to ensure active participation of relevant stakeholders in a risk identification brainstorm, and forthe
facilitator to manage group dymamics careful. No templates or examples are presented inthis append

1.2.1.3 Cause and Effect (Ishikawa) Diagrams

‘This technique presents in eiagrammatc form the causes wich contribute toa given outcome. Each main
cause canbe spit further into sub-causes. To use this technique fr risk dentficaton the outcome shouldbe stated
2s an eect ona project objective, Le. the impact ofa sk The diagram then identifies risks as those uncertain
events which coud esut in occurrence ofthe impact. Care needs to be taken wen using this technique for
risk identicatio to distinguish between risks (uncertain causes ofthe impact) and issues (certain causes of the
impact. An example cause and effect shikawa) diagram is shown below the rik effect) to be analyzed is stat
leaving the project’; the man causes are Environment, Ambition, Career Prospects, Satisfaction, Remuneration

Figure 02. Example of a Cause and Effector Ishikawa Diagram for Staff Leaving

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

a) appenoix 0

12.1.4 Checklists

Checks are compiled to capture previous projet experience and allow tobe used for subsequent similar
ptojects. tis possible to structure the rsk identification checklist around a sk breakdown structure, as shown
inthe partial example below. is useful to present te checklist as ase of risks, each of which is considered in
tum to determine whether it might be relevant othe project under consideration. Rsk identfcation checklists
should include both treats and opportunites.

‘oud re rex efec out pact?

Figure D3. Example (Fragment) of a Checklist with Typical Structure of Category, Subcategory,
‘Specific Risks and Effect

5 Delphi Technique

‘The Delphi technique uses a fcitated anonymous poling of subject matter experts to identity risks in their
‘area of expertise. The fcitator gathers the experts’ nal esponses and circulates them without attribution
to the group, who may revise ther contributions based on thase of others. The process often generates a
consensus of the expert in a few erations, No templates or examples are presented,

6 Document Review

Risks can be identified through careful review of project documentation, including the project charter,
statement of work, contract terms and conditions, subcontracts, technical specifications, regulatory
requirements, legal stipulations etc (where relevant) Formal structured methods of document review can be
sed (such as the Fagan Inspection Process), or a more informal approach may be adopted. No templates or
‘examples are presented,

7 FMEA/Fault Tree Analysis.

Failure Modes and Effects Analysis FMEA) or Fault Tree Analysis is the analysis of a model stuctured to
identity the various elements that can cause system failure by themselves, or in combination with others,

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘APPENDIX D.

‘based on the logic of the system. Ful tre analysis is typically used in engineering contexts. Itcan be adapted

for use to identity risks by analyzing how risk impacts might

arise. Another result is the probability of faiure

(or of reiablty, mean tine between faut, etc) ofthe overall system, indicating the level of qualty ofthe
system or product. the level of reliability isnot acceptable, the Faul Tree can indicate wiere the system can
‘be made more reliable—therefoe, itis useful inthe design and engineering phase of the project. An example

is shown below.
7 ‘Quantification of Fault Tees
Bid ee Aono con tow ae nary abe
iia Se" | we {Spec nat ees erry

= yo :
222

S®

Figure D4. Fault Tree Analysis ofthe Possible Causes ofa Crash atthe Main Road Junction
(this willbe changed to be more project-oriented)

1.2.1.8 Force Field Analysis

Force Feld Analysis is typically used in the change management context. t can be adapted fr risk
identification by identityng criving forces (‘ores for change") and restraining forces (‘forces against change”)
\which current affect achievement of a project objective. sks can then be identified as uncertain events or
conditions which would lead to a change in the strength of one or more ofthe identified forces. An example

force fel diagram is shown below.

‘2208 ret Mangement, racice Sana Prt Ak Mags


‘APPENDIX D.

Figure DS. Example ofa Force Field Analysis and the Balance of Forces For and Against Change

9 Industry Knowledge Base

‘Anindusry knowledge base i @ special case of a checklist (ee above), andi used similarly. No templates
cor examples are presented

10 Influence Diagrams

‘An influence diagram is a chagrammatic representation of a project situation, showing the main entities,
decison points, uncertainties, and outcomes, and indicating the relationships (fluences) between them. The
influence diagram can identy risks when combined with sensitivity analysis or Monte Caro simulation to
‘reveal sources of risk within the project. An example i shown below,

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

appenoix 0 Oa

Figure D6, Example ofan influence Diagram in a Bidding Situation

2.1.11 Interviews

Fisk identification interviews should include all man stakeholders and be conducted by an independent
stile interviewer using a structured agenda, in an atmosphere of confidentiality, honesty, and mutual ust. A
riskbreakdowm structure, checklst or prompt ist can be used asa framework fr rik interviews. No templates
‘orexamples are presented

2.1.12 Nominal Group Technique

‘The Nominal Group Technique isan adaptation of brainstorming where participants share and discuss all
issues before evaluation, with each participant participating equaly in evaluation. No templates or examples
ate presented

1.2.1.13 Post-Project Reviews/Lessons Leamed/Historical Information

Information relevant to risks for a current project can be obtained by reviewing databases of risks which
‘ccurted in previous similar situations. Such databases might arise from post-projct reviews or lessons
learned exercises. They may also exist as repositories of historical information, ether within an organization of
industry body. No templates or examples are presented.

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

a) appenoix 0

12.41.14 Prompt Lists

‘A prompt itis a st of rik categories which can be used to stimulate risk identification. The prompt list
may be presented asa risk breakdown structure (see below), or asa st of headings. A number of standard
‘romp ists have been developed for use in risk identification, and some ofthese are presented below. These
can then be used asa framework for other rik idenication techniques such as brainstorming (see D.2.1.2)
or risk inlerviews (see 2.1.11)
1. The PESTLE prompt ist:
Political
+ Economic
© Social
+ Technological
+ Legal
+ Environmental
2. The TECOP prompt st
+ Technical
+ Environmental
+ Commercial
+ Operational
* Political
3. The SPECTRUM prompt list
+ Soco-cutural
* Poltical
+ Economic
+ Competitive
+ Technology
+ Regulatoryfegal
+ Uncertantysk
© Market

15 Questionnaire

‘A risk dentiication questionnaire can be presented as a special form of checklist (see 0.2.1.4), where
possible rsks are show in question format (for example “Is the cents requirement cleary defined") rather

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

appenoix 0 Oa

than as risk statements ("The cient may change the requirement after project start"). Atematively a risk
‘denticaton questionnaire can be used to present the headings from a prompt list (see D.2.1.14), asking
‘questions such as"Aze there any uncertainties arising from the use of technology on ths project” No templates
or examples are presented

1.21.16 Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS)
‘Te risk breakdown structure (RBS) sa hierarchical framework of potential sources of risk to a project. An

‘organization may develop a generic RBS for use across allt projets, ora project may use a project-specitic
‘RBS. A partial example RBS is shown below.

es Leve.o ees uve. es ueve.2

pe deine
1 rents ei
13 nas, Senos, ne oS
‘reonwoaL sk [14 Tees praees
15 ety
1 Tele ro
fe
2 Fajen
2.2 Poyranertoa naan
23 errs monet
umuceuent ask [24 Oanzton

25 Resrong
26 Gommaiesion

A sunces oF fe

Praser mse 2 Coca sad a

517 bs poosener
35 Sposa woe
scomenci nsx [24 Sibomtace

‘35 Cerdesons daily
516 Paresh sor ene
fe
42 Bane
“3 Stat
soremacnsc [44 eiemenavear

5 Conpeitin
4 Reon,
fe

Figure D7. Example of a Generic Risk Breakdown Structure

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

a) appenoix 0

2.1.17 Root-Cause Analysis

‘A root cause analysis seeks to identity basic causes of risks that may be vsble symptoms of more
fundamental forces. It may also identify common sources of several risks, leading to broad-reaching risk
response strategies. Similar, care needs to be taken when using tis technique fr risk identification to
distinguish between risks (uncertain causes of the impact) and isues (certain causes ofthe impact. Inthe
diagram shown below the risks that wre intaly identified included rework, extra cost, schedule slips, low
team morale, customer mistrust and repeated audits. An examination ofthe denied risks lead toa common
‘oo cause, that later phases ofthe project were typical started before the eater ones were sufficiently
mature. This orgarization repeatedly ignored the proper phase entry prerequisites, hastening later project
‘stages inorder to speedup the projec.

Figure D8. Example ofa Root Cause Analysis,

2.1.18 SWOT Analysis

‘SWOT Analysis identifies four characteristics of a given situation: strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and
threats. The technique is commonly used in strategic decision making can be adapted for isk identification
by changing the interpretation ofthe four perspectives, such that strengths and weaknesses relate tothe
characteristics ofthe organization conducting the project, and opportunities and threats identity the project
risks. The technique is particulary useful for identiyng intemaly-generated risks arising from within the
‘organization. For example opportunities might be found by leveraging organizational strengths, or threats
imight arise a a result of organizational weaknesses, as ilustrated below.

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘APPENDIX D.

‘Stop: ey ist manzti
Senge ard waiesss ng
eaten

Figure 09, Example of a SWOT Analysis Structure

1.2.1.9 System Dynamics

System dynamics ($0) is a particular application of influence diagrams (see above), and can be used
to identity risks within a project situation. The SD model represents entities and information flows within 2
project, and analysis of the model can revel feed-back and feed-forward loops wich lead to uncertainty
(or instability. edition, the results of an SD analysis can show the impacto rik events on overall project
results, such as the cot or schedule results to be expected, Analyses of changes inthe mode or assumptions
can indicate the system's sensitivity to specific events, some of which may be risks. A simple example ofan
0 diagram is shown in Figure 011

Figure 010. Example of a Simple System Dynamics Model with Feedback Loops

‘2208 ret Mangement, racice Sana Prt Ak Mags

a) appenoix 0

2.1.20 WBS Review

‘The work breskdon stucture (WBS) fora project can fam a ramewerk for @ numberof ber risk identification
techniques, such a brainstorming rskintriws, checkists or prompt iss No emplatesorexagles are presented,

D.3 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Perform Qualitative Risk
Analysis (Chapter 6)

Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis prioritizes for further analysis or handling the uniferentiated ist of risks
thathave been identified inthe dentiy Risks process. Organizations tend to appl resources to those designated
“high risk,” based on their prio, oten indicate by the risks’ probably and impact characteristic.

D.3.1. Techniques for Perform Qualtitative Risk Analysis
Example of approaches are given in Table D3 and D.8.1.1 through D.3.1.3

‘Table D3. Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis

(Fs For Efectve
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘Application
oot Cause Analysis
See Chapter 5
ximatng techniques |» Adresses bo | © Dieut carat | + Agreed deinons
(eppiedio probaity | key dimensions of | thereisnohistocl | of robabity and
ad impacts) ask, name is eatbase of simiar | impacts which
egies of uncertainty | events ‘ect stakeholders!
(exressed as + Toms orprobaity | iskinerances and
probabity and ts |” (erat, teshalés
effect on project almost certain and | © Valves used in
objectives exesed | forimpact (9 the defnitons
asimpac) insignificant, majo) | represent the same
ae ambiguous and | lve of impact
subjective across objectives
Impacts can as perceived by
teuncerainor ‘re oganzatons
represenied bya management or
rangeofvalues at | poet stakeholders
anna be puto 2 | + Consistent use of
speciicimpactlevel | hese definitions
suchas‘moderate | across ll denied
impact on tine" ‘sks

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘APPENDIX D
Table D3 Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (continued)
(Fs for Efectve
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘plication
ocesst SMES wha
ave experience wth
the te of rk
Post poet reviews!
Lessons Leamed
tora! omaton
~ 500 Chapter 5
Probability andimpact | lows eaganzabn | © Does not explicty |» Pxlmaiarequres
Matrix Mato) ‘oprntze te andle oer factrs |” atthe put
trject rss or suchas urgency or | data are dear and
futteranajss(e9, | manageabiy tat | urambigus in
cuanttave)orrsk | may party determine | asningleves of
response ares ranking ‘pobbily and imgact
+ Retectsthe + Therangeof fective estimation of
crgarzatonsevelof | unceraity inthe | impact ad ikenood
‘ektoleance sssesument ofa as otined previously
‘ks probably or | «organizations souls
impactmay overapa | " pe carlo acess
boundary ‘the combinations of

probability and impact
that qualify arisk

as lw, maderate or
high risk o thatthe
method used reflects
‘he organization's risk
ate

Defntions used to
esigate the levels
of impact (MH)
foreach objective
should represent

the same level of
impact as perceived
bythe organization's
management of
projet stakeholders
asteflecting the
organization’ wilty
funetion

(continued)

‘2208 ret Mangement, racice Sana Prt Ak Mags


a) appenoix 0

Table D3, Techniques for Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis (continued)

(SF for Effective
Teetnique Strengths Weaknesses ‘Application
AnalticHirarcty | © Assists in developing | + Orgarzatoral | « Exper facia in
Process ardatve weghing | decsionsareoten | the process
for project objectives | made by commitees, | « agreement by
thatretects be andingivuals may |” management tat it
ganizations rot agre onelatve | use to develop
nies frie, rion among a consistent sto
cast, scope and abjectves triories among
uaiy forthe projet | « cuit to gather the | objectives
Assists the creation | information about | «Use of proper metiod
ofan verl poject | pairwise comparon | " gravee AXP
vont istofisks | ofthe objectives Software
created fom the from iil
‘isk’ pronty win | management
respect individ
objeties|
oot Cause Araysis
~ see Grater 5

A Estimating Techniques Applied to Probability and impact,

‘The probability of risk occuring can be specified in several tferent ways. One common way is to assign
levels of isk probability by ranges of probably. One benefit of this approach i tha the subject matter experts
only need to assess a risk’s probability within a range rather than asa specific value. An example, assuming
that a 55 Probabilty and Impact Matrix is desired, is shown in Figure D11 where the probabil ranges are
more tight defined at low eves of probably.

Examples of impact level defitions ae very project-specific. The values used to specify the level of impact
‘rom very low to very high ia 55 matrix is being used) should be:

+ Higher impact, for threats or opportunites, as they move from very low to very high for a specitic
objective
* Levels are defined by the organization as causing the sae amount of pain o gain to the project for
each level across objectives,
+ tf arisk’s possible impact is uncertain and could be assigned to more than one level of impact.
‘rom maderate to high) the analyst may choose to asign the risk to the impact level that represents
the expected or average impact. Alternatively, the risk may be flagged for extra analysis in order to
reduce the range of uncertainty to fit within a single range
‘An example of impact level dfintons is shown in Figure D11. These definitions shouldbe talored or scaled
by stakeholders tothe specific project. The definitions, appropriately taled to the project, can be used for
‘opportunites and threats

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

appenoix 0 Oa

“E IMPACT OX PRONECT OBECTIVES
‘cost ‘quarry

exa0y | stoaays | sseom | wry some impucten owt eerily
* ‘rao | ztandan | st01s0e | Scant inact on rat ety
eo | avany | wana | ssixstook | some impactiniey tatoos
o rea | eioaays | sinks: | mormpat nora inctenaty
wo om | rSeay | sin st0c | tr pact on seco fons
oy is _| techn | woctowe | vo rw ntectonaty

Figure D1. Example of Definitions for Levels of Probability and Impact on Four Specific Objectives
Used to Evaluate Individual Risks.

Note—Opportunities are to be treated as representing a postive saving in time or cost, o increased
functionality. For treats, each impact scale s interpreted negatively, ie. time delays, increased cost, or
reduced functionality

3.1.2 Probability and Impact Matrix

Organizations typically assess a risks priority on an objective from the combination of probability of
‘occurrence and impact on that project objective, using defitions such as those shown in Figure D11. Risks
ate then placed on a probability and impact (P-) matrix, such as one shown below. This matrix includes both
threats and opperturites.

wow | ow | woo |
pect Tweets) monet (Oportntion)

Figure 012. Example of Probability-Impact Matrix Used to Sort Risks (Threats and Opportunities) into
High Risk (H), Moderate Risk (M) and Low Risk (L) Classes.

‘7000 ret Manageme stu, Pace Sande Pe Ak Manager|

a) appenoix 0

1.3.1.3 Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP)

AHP i a method to calibrate preferences for achieving the diferent objectives ofa project. Do they prefer
to achieve time more than cost? fs quality more important than scope? What isthe relative weighting of the
project's objectives in terms oftheir priority tothe stakeholders or to management? The results are weights
{summing to 100%) that reflect the relative priority of each objective. Ths prioritization can be important in
determining how trade-ofs affecting itferent objectives (e.g, Should we reduce scope to finish on time?)
will be decided. can also be used to create an overall project risk priority list from risks that have been
assessed on their implications for individual objectives. Specialized software implementing AHP is avaliable. A
spreadsheet implementation is shown below.

Eq Pater

iy Pee

Mosely Petes

‘var ered

Figure 013. Example of Analytic Hierarchy Process Computations to Determine the Relative Weighting
of Four Project Objectives

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

appenoix 0 Oa

D.4 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Perform Quantitative Risk
‘Analysis (Chapter 7)

Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis seeks to determine the overall isk to project objectives wen all risks
potentially operate simultaneously onthe project. lt provides answers to several questions:

+ How likely isthe project o complete onthe schedule dat or earlier? How likely isthe project actual cost
tobe the budgeted costo ess? How reliable wil the product be that the project produces? Whats the
best decison to make inthe face of uncertain results?

+ How much contingency in time and cos is needed to provide the organization with its desired degree of
confidence in the results? How should the design of the producto system be changed mast economically
to increase its reliability?

What are the individual risks tht seem tobe the most important in determining the oveal projec ik?

D.4.1. Techniques for Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis

Examples of techniques for Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis are found shown in Table D4 and details are
ven in 0.4.1.1 through D.4.1.5

SF For efectve
‘Technique ‘Strengths Weaknesses: application
Decne anaes | = cases te * tissoetnes | + ca iuctungt
oman tfeatiocea tte | theacun te Al
Siectecsts | tecomaivcre”” | senate descos
auiometsar|+ Pooatesot | ata mtraly
Geosors wen |" Graemeccan be | flesh
teresa Sineutoquniy | costed, dexson
domneinesty | teameeeot” | Woes Sou be
trea ads | ise ata Sct! cy
+ Soutoratne "|. Teton nay | * Rees aaty
Geomoneteps | maaan | St aet shy
cart eect | aor
Tatpoae ne | ROME | ecco ard
nested | fatter’ may | sen soectd ig
‘Monetary Value or ‘not be stable historical information
Gerd aty ote |, SE | monet
oma Teopristnney | ie
kel | aly
Eee taco at hes
ucts turer | been valid with
eet | te oumiaors
a | cnn
‘axe dificult to specity
‘emineo

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

‘APPENDIX D.
(SFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘Application
+ The organization may | + Avalabilty and
‘otmake decisions | understanding of the
‘sed ona tinear specialized software
Expected Monetary | needed to stuctue
Value bass butrather | and solve the
ona nonsnear ecision tee
uility function tty
functions are ifcult
to specity
+ Decision tree analysis
of complicated
situations requires
specialized though
avaiable) software
+ There may be some
resistance to using
technical approaches
{a decision-making
‘pected Monetary Value | © EMV allows the user | + Assessment of ‘dentiication ofa
en to caloiate the probability frisky possible events that
weighted average events occuring and | need tobe included in
(expected) value ofan | of ther impact canbe | the EMV calculation
event thatincudes | aificult to make ‘cess to historical
uncertain autoomes | « EMV provides only ata or expert
© ttiswel-sutes to the expected value | opinions onthe
Decision Tee Analysis | of uncertain events; | _vaues of probability
+ EVincorporates risk decisions and impact that
both the probability | fen require more are needed for he
‘and impact ofthe Information than EMV | calculation of EMV
uncertain events an provide Understanding ofthe
+ EWisasimple | * EMV is sometimes ‘erence between
calculation that sed in situations MV andthe output
oes nt require where Monte Caro | of simulation tools
Specialized sofware | simulaon would be | such as Mante Caro
more appropiate and | anahsis
‘provide additonal
Information atout risk
PME Fault Tee Analysis
= see Chapter 5

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘APPENDIX D
(Fe For Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘plication
Morte Caro Simulation | + Used primary fr | + Schedules are |» Creation ofa good
project sceae and | "nat simple and project made. Typical
fast riskanaysisin | often camot be models cide the
Statagcdectons | usedin simulation | costestmate andthe
«lows all speciied | without significant | schedule
rks vary de-bugging by an | 6 Ugesummaryevel
simutaneotsy expert scheduler |" magts such at
+ Calculates Toe quality ofthe ‘roect schedules and
Ceantatve estimates | inputcta depends | —costestimates
of overall project risk; ‘heavily on the expert | » Access to high-
‘reflects the reality Judgment and the ‘quality data on risks
‘that several risks may effort and expertise of ‘including the risk’s:
‘occur together on the ‘the risk analyst ‘impact on project
Project Simulations clement, uncetan
«+ Proves answers | sometimes rested | actvyauratons
fDquesionssucn | bymanagenentas | anduncerain
SsiHowielys | Being umecessay | cost elements the
fhetasepantote | ortosopististed | credblty depends on
Success How | compares to the quality ofthe ata
muchcotingeney | Yadtonal project | coeted
intmeandcos do | managementicols | 6 Use of carect
weneedtoachiewe | + Mane Caro simulation
fur desedievelof |” simulaon equres
anise? specialize stare
(3) Which activities: ‘which must be
sxe important in cquied and eames
determing te causing a barra
eral proectnisk? | ts use
Wil produce
areas resus
tnlss input cata
‘nla ot teats
and opportunites
Pest projet reviews!
Lessons Lear
tora! omaton
= 500 Captor 5
‘Sptem Dynamics
~ seo Ghaptor 5

‘2208 ret Mangement, racice Sana Prt Ak Mags


a) appenoix 0

DAA Decision Tree Analysis

Decision tree analysis is usualy performed using specialized, but widely avallable software. The software
allows the user to speciy the structure of the decision with decision nodes, chance nade, costs, benefits, and
‘brobablies. The user can also evaluate the iferent decisions using linear uit functions based on Expected
Monetary Value or on non-linear utility function of various shapes. An example is shown below were:

+ The negative numbers represent outows or investments (eg. COTS)
+ The percentages represent probabilities ofthe event occuring (9, Major Problems)
+ The positive numbers represent rewards or valves (0. after “Fic the Problem")

ru" indicates the decision option taken from the square decision node, whereas “false
indicates the decision option not taken

Figure 014. Example ofa Decision Tee for Choosing between an Experimental Technology vs.
Commercial Of the Shelf (COTS) Technology
Saurce: Precision Tree from Palisade Corporation

1.4.1.2 Expected Monetary Value

Expected Monetary Value (EMU) sa simple calculation ofa value such as weighted average r expected cost
‘or beneft when the outcomes are uncertain Alleasonahle alternative automes are identified. Ther probabilities
of occurtng (summing to 100%) and their values are estimated. The EN calculation s made forthe entire event
by weighting the individual possible outcomes by their probabites of occurring, as shown in Figure D1.

3 Monte Carlo Simulation

Monte Calo simulation is detailed, computr-intensive simulation approach to determining the value and
probability of possible outcomes ofa project objective such asa project schedule (e.g the completion date) or
cost estimate (eg, the total cos) computes the schedule or cos estimate many times using inputs dawn at

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

appenoix 0 Oa

‘sample tan Expected Monetary Va (EM) olution for «Bins Strategy tht Depends

‘on bncertan Met Doman
‘Uncerisin Outcome Reward (8000) | Probably (%) [Commun to EY
a ret Denar 0 mm 2000

Figure D15. Example of an Expected Monetary Value Calculation when there are Three Uncertain
Product Demand Scenarios

random from ranges spected with probability distribution functions for schedule activity durations o cost ine
items. The soluons using these diferent input values ae used to buld histogram of possible project outcomes
and their relative probability, and cumulative probably frm which to compute desired contingency reserves of
‘ime or cost. Addon results include the relative importance ofeach inputin determining the overall project cost
‘and schedule. Examples ofthe ouput of schedule and cost risk results are shown in igues D16 and D17.

1.4.1.4 Monte Carlo Analysis of Finish Dates in Quantitative Schedule Risk Analysis,

Figure D16. Example Histogram from Monte Carlo Simulation ofa Project Schedule
‘Source: Pertmastr v8.0 Primavera Pertmaster

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

a) appenoix 0

D.41.5 Monte Carlo Analysis of Project Cost at Completion in Quantitative Cost Risk Analysis

Total Project Cost

PEEEEE SEES

fare

A
i

D ry compen do

Figure 017. Example Histogram from Monte Carlo Simulation of a Project Cost Estimate
‘Source: Crystal Bal. 7.3.8 from Oracle Hyperion (Decsioneering)

D.5 Techniques, Examples, and Templates for Plan Risk Responses
(Chapter 8)
Han Rsk Responses develop the set of action required to tke info account the projects rks and

their characteristics, and integrates them into the corresponding project management plan. The resultant plan
should satsy the risk appetites and attitudes ofthe key stakeholders.

5.1 Techniques for Plan Risk Response

‘Techniques fr Plan Risk Responses are given in Table DS and Sections D.5.1.1 through D.6.1.5

Technique Strengths Weaknesses (SFS for Effective
‘Application

Brainstorming

= see Chapir 5

Check Liss

= see Chapter 5

Contingency planning | + Ensuesthatacions |  Cangiveatase teeing | « The tigger conditions
‘eavalbletoadess | of confidence ~ as, must be clearly
‘signfeant evens ifthe ik had been defined and tracked
before the accurence | avoided

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

‘APPENDIX D
(FS for Efetive
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘plication
‘ows apis an The plans need be
focused response vakiated pericaly
Improves mage of Witingnes of he
professionals of ‘ganization 0
fhe way in wien he execite the plan and
projets manages provide te budget
fd resouces en
the tigger eontion
Cantogeny reserve Provides avatonale | Makestheesere | Poly fo reserve
estimation foresees visible and therefore | management agreed
basis forconstuctve | abletbereduced | with sponsor and
dfn th sabiraly ‘enloe management
sponsor
Creal Chain Project | + Aang witmany ater | + Feeding bters can | + Requires fuly
‘Management (CPM) approaches, insists deal with predictable resourced project
nresoing resource | — comman cause schedule
rity sues Yarn, butmay be | « Understanding of
‘when developing the | inadequate to cater” |” and acreplance
shee forspecialcases | bymanayement
Aektesse schedule | + “cave” stat and project team
vekyteasiton |” andenddatscan | members that the
ensngtufes” | dtu conventional | acy dates are
tba saisial | management, inate rate than
varatonson be expectations, definite promises,
darter ofron-catal | and may cause being general set
path activities to reduce problems for ‘to provide a 50%
frerconnbaan'o | ting mtemedate | conence level
schol ik milestones Equitable shang
Party gates Assumption hatbase |" of he bufes by
facia by estimatesrepreent | allteam members
anling te amount | 50M confidence ‘anced
sworkinprocess” | — evel (his wetness
“Bate penetaton’ | ist loved inal
thesoliscanbe sed | vant of tis class
tigger canton | of to)
ferspeteresanse | + Notalproect
tone schedules ae tly
Special software is resourced
‘taal for cet
sd manag he
bates
(continued)

‘2208 ret Mangement, racice Sana Prt Ak Mags


APPENDIX D
(Fs fr Etfetive
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘Application
Decision Tee Analysis | Allows calculation
— see Chapter 7 ofthe expect
monetary values of
various response
‘options as wellas the
value ofthe outcomes
inthe worst case and
the best case
Debi Tecnique Involves selected
— see Chapter 5 experi the process
Expected Monetary Provides an estimate
Value (4) ofthe potential
benef of risk
— see Chapter 7
va response
Force Fi Analysis The diagram can
= see Chapter 5 suggest whee best to
apply the responses
Industry knowledge base | © Some risks have
= see Chapter 5 standard responses
Interviews Experienced
= see Chapter 5 practtoners can
provide both new
ideas and act as
“duis advocate" fr
potential esponses
Nominal Group Useful as a cretity
Technique technique for
oe Chapter ‘generating novel
responses
Muii-criterion selection |» Provide ameans |» Can give counte- |» Needs an agreed set
tectniques| of selecting the intuit sults of weighted projet
responses that best success otra
suppor the ful set
of projec objectives

Post-projct reviews!
Lessons Learned!
Historical Information
see Chapter 5

Leverages previous
experience

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

(Fs for Efective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘Application

Prompt Lists Stimulates creativity
= see Chapters

(Quantitative Risk * Provides ameans | + Can be tooliwoved | © Prior effective
Analysis ‘of evaluating the ‘or complex forthe ‘qualitative analysis
— see Chapter 7 potential effect benefit envisaged

ofthe response
plans on the overall
Project risk

Foot Cause Anayis | + Alows he

se Oper trganiaton

va ‘to identify and
tacts the
fundamental
case oF ks
fereicent ant
tect espns
responding st
there ofthe
totais sy
eect ares
utiles

+ can povie a
rman of entyng
Symptons for use
a rage conions
ferconingert,
responses

Scenario Analysis Provides view ofthe | + Addstothe stor |  Allparticipans need
potential effect of assumptions ‘2 good understanding
therelevantriskand | 6 canbe time ofthe project plans
‘the coresponding ‘consuming
response strategy

Forces the
participants to
‘analyze the efect of
‘any strategy

+ Helps oientty
secondary risks

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

a) appenoix 0

15.1.1 Contingency Planning

For specific (nrmally high-impact) risks, the risk owner may choose to assemble a team to develop a
response, as ifthe rsk had genuinely happened. The coresponding plan, with the supporting information,
should then be documented and approved at project management or sponsor level This approval mustincude
‘authorization to deploy the coresponding resurces ifthe predefined trigger conditions arse. No templates or
‘examples are presented,

2 Contingency Reserve Estimation

‘lof the conditional response plans, as well ny ofthe residual risks wl f they occur have an effect on the
schedule and/or budget andor performance objectives ofthe project. An amount me and cost) needs to be
set aside to allow for these eventualies. This amount is made up of two components: those to cover speci,
approved conditional responses (e.g. contingency plans, an those to adress unspecified or passively accepted
risk. Quantitative methods see chapter 7) can be used to determine the amounts that should beset aside (e0
decision trees for contional responses, simulation forthe set f unspecified risks). These reserves are racked
and managed in Monitor and Congo Risks (chapter 9). No templates or examples represented

3 Multi-Criteria Selection Techniques

‘Thisis an adaptation ofthe Perform Qualtatve Risk Analysis Process (chapter 6) based on selection criteria,
‘The example below shows the use of a spreadsheet to calculate the weighted scores of two options, based on
predefined set of prioritized criteria: “point isthe product of “weight” by “rating.

Figure D18. Example of Comparing Options by their Ratings Along Four Priortized Criteria,

4 Scenario Analysis,

Scenario analysis fr risk response planning involves defining several plausible altematve scenarios (0.
‘no change and all goes to plan, disaster occurs, utopia et). The diferent scenarios may require diferent risk
responses that can be described and evaluated for their cost and effectiveness. If the organization can choose
betvieen scenarios, the altematves incluting the responses can be compared. the scenarios re out ofthe
control of the organization, the scenario analysis can lead toetfectve and necessary contingency planing

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

100

appenoix 0 |

No template is offered for this technique.

5.15 Critical Chain Project Management
Asimplectical chain network is shown in Figure D19.

Figure 019. Simple Critical Chain Network

D.6 Techniques, Examples and Templates for Monitor and Control Risks
(Chapter 9)

Monitor and Control Risks provides the assurance that risk responses are being apple, verifies whether
they are effective and as necessary initiates corrective actions.

D.6.1 Techniques for Monitor and Control Risks Process
‘Techniques for Monitor and Contra Risks are given in Table D6 and 0.6.1.1 through 0.6.16.

‘TABLE D6. Monitor and Control Risks Example

(Fs for Efective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘Application

Ciitical Chan Project | + Use of burfer
Management (@CPM) penetration to tgger
= see Chapter 8 ‘actions such as

adjusting the relative

Prionty of tasks

(continued)

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

APPENDIX D
(OSFs for Effective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘pplication

Reserve Analysis Provides ameansof | * Could lead to Prior detaled reser
‘racking spend and | unwaranted focus on | planning
releasing contingency | cost dimension Accurate sizing of
amounts a risks ‘tenon toveral | the contingency
expire canbe applied |" measur ofresene | reserve aftime or
toschedule eserves | depletion may hide | castrlatve tothe
inthe same way detailed risks tsk to veal prject
Gives early Waring of ‘completion date and
need to communicate budget
wt sponsor

Fisk Audits Provide formal Can be dsp to | * Wel-specie sk
assessment ofthe | the project and iaken | management plan
‘compliance withthe | as oojudgementalto | 6 sensivty tothe
approach specified in | the project eam burdn places on
the ik management the project eam
plan

Risk Reassessment Forces review of | * Takestime and effot | * Wel-mainsined
the project risks project and sk
when it becomes documentation
necessary so tat he scheme
tskregistr remains
uptodate

Status Meetings Provide ameansof | © Can seem Good meetng
vein infrmation | unnecessaryto some | preparation and
about the status participants dsciine
of iks ace,
‘occured, relied) and
maintaining team
understanding

“rend Analysis Provides an nication | » Requires Regular reporting and
ofthe effectiveness of | understanding of ‘naif the ical
earlier responses sonficantvs.non- | values,
Can provide tigger | sgificant variation
‘conditions for
responses

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

FT:

appenoix 0 Oa

(Fs for Efective
Technique Strengths Weaknesses ‘Application
Variance Analysis, * Alows comparison | + Does nt show + Realistic pir
between forecast and | relationship with definitions of
‘actual riskimpacts | eater data reshald for
+ Canprovide tigger | + The values can be ignibcan variance”
‘conditions for taken out of context
responses:
‘Provides data
for Earned Value
‘Analysis which can
be compared to
quantitative risk
analysis results

6.1.1 Reserve Analysis

‘An analytical technique to determine the essential features and relationships of components in the
project management plan to establish a reserve for the schedule duration, budget, estimated cast, or
funds for a project. Tracking the state of the reserve through project execution will pravide summary
information as tothe evolution of the status of the corresponding risks. Ths information can be useful
when reporting up the organization to those responsible for several projects. In adition, once a
Corresponding risk occurs or ceases to be current (Le. when it can no longer impact the project), the
corresponding reserve needs tobe reviewed in order to assess whether it stil provides the agreed level
of confidence,

‘Time buffers canbe used in two different ways:
* To provide for accepted schedule sks, as described above or
+ Asa scheduling-elated technique in citical chan project management (CCPH).

In contrast withthe contingency reserve for identified risks, the buffers in CCPM provide a shared
mechanism for accommodating the natural variability of activity durations over a sequence (or chain) of
activities, Tracking the rate at which each such butfer is used during project execution provides valuable
information at a given point in time as to the level of schedule risk along that chain, and is used in
‘CCPH for adapting the priority or management focus for additional analysis and as necessary triggering
further risk management activities.

No templates or examples ae presented

‘Gzi08 ret Mangement, ace Sand Pra Ak Mago

a) appenoix 0

1.6.1.2 Risk Audits
Fisk audits are caried out in order to evaluate

* Are the risk management rules being caried out as specitied?
Are the risk management rules adequate for controling the project?

No templates or examples ae presented

3 Risk Reassessment

‘The objective of risk reassessment is to ensure tha the ful risk management cycle i repeated as required
to ensure effective contal, Se Figure 020.

Figure 020. The Risk Reassessment Process

4 Status Meetings
Risks can and shouldbe onthe agenda at al project reviews. Typical the agenda tems should cover the
following
+ Top prot sks at present,
©. Are there any changes?
+ Fisks or vigger conditions that have occured
(© Whatis the status ofthe actions?

‘G2i08 Pet agement, Pace Sada Pret Risk Maapemant

104

